SEC. 6723. REQUIREMENTS AND REPORT ON WORKFORCE NEEDS OF INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY RELATING TO SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING, AND MATH, AND RELATED AREAS.

(a) Requirements.--The Director of National Intelligence, in coordination with the heads of human capital from each element of the intelligence community, shall--
	(1) develop a plan for the recruitment and retention of personnel to positions the primary duties of which involve the integration, maintenance, or use of artificial intelligence (and the retention and training of personnel serving in such positions), including with respect to the authorities and requirements under section 6732(b);
	(2) develop a plan for the review and evaluation, on a continuous basis, of the expertise necessary to accelerate the adoption of artificial intelligence and other emerging technology solutions; and
	(3) coordinate and share information and best practices relating to such recruitment and retention within the element and across the intelligence community.
(b) Report.--
	(1) Submission.--Not later than January 1, 2024, the Director of National Intelligence, in coordination with heads of human capital from each element of the intelligence community, shall submit to the congressional intelligence committees, the Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, and the Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives a single report on the workforce needs of each element of the intelligence community relating to emerging technologies, with a specific focus on artificial intelligence.
	(2) Elements.--The report under paragraph (1) shall include, with respect to each element of the intelligence community, the following:
		(A) A description of the number and types of personnel in work roles whose primary official duties include artificial intelligence responsibilities.
		(B) A detailed description of the plans for each element developed pursuant to subsection (a).	(3) Other matters.--The report under paragraph (1) shall also include an assessment of the quality and sustainability of the talent pipeline of the intelligence community with respect to talent in emerging technologies, including artificial intelligence. Such assessment shall include the following:
		(A) A description of the education, recruitment, and retention programs (including skills-based training and career and technical educational programs) available to personnel of the intelligence community, regardless of whether such programs are administered by the head of an element of the intelligence community or the head ofanother Federal department or agency, and an analysis of how such programs support the quality and sustainability of such talent pipeline.
		(B) A description of the relevant authorities available to the heads of the elements of the intelligence community to promote the quality and sustainability of such talent pipeline.
		(C) An assessment of any gaps in authorities, resources, recruitment or retention incentives, skills-
based training, or educational programs, that may negatively affect the quality or sustainability of such talent pipeline.
	(4) Form.--The report under paragraph (1) shall be submitted in classified or unclassified form, as appropriate.

(c) Information Access.--The heads of the elements of the intelligence community shall furnish to the Director of National Intelligence such information as may be necessary for the development of the report under subsection (b).