SEC. 505. Establishment of Artificial Intelligence Security Center.
(a) Establishment.—Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of the National Security Agency shall establish an Artificial Intelligence Security Center within the Cybersecurity Collaboration Center of the National Security Agency.

(b) Functions.—The functions of the Artificial Intelligence Security Center shall be as follows:

(1) Making available a research test bed to private sector and academic researchers, on a subsidized basis, to engage in artificial intelligence security research, including through the secure provision of access in a secure environment to proprietary third-party models, with the consent of the vendors of the models.

(2) Developing guidance to prevent or mitigate counter-artificial intelligence techniques.

(3) Promoting secure artificial intelligence adoption practices for managers of national security systems (as defined in section 3552 of title 44, United States Code) and elements of the defense industrial base.

(4) Coordinating with the Artificial Intelligence Safety Institute of the National Institute of Standards and Technology.

(5) Such other functions as the Director considers appropriate.

(c) Test bed requirements.—

(1) ACCESS AND TERMS OF USAGE.—

(A) RESEARCHER ACCESS.—The Director shall establish terms of usage governing researcher access to the test bed made available under subsection (b)(1), with limitations on researcher publication only to the extent necessary to protect classified information or proprietary information concerning third-party models provided through the consent of model vendors.

(B) AVAILABILITY TO FEDERAL AGENCIES.—The Director shall ensure that the test bed made available under subsection (b)(1) is also made available to other Federal agencies on a cost-recovery basis.

(2) USE OF CERTAIN INFRASTRUCTURE AND OTHER RESOURCES.—In carrying out subsection (b)(1), the Director shall leverage, to the greatest extent practicable, infrastructure and other resources provided under section 5.2 of the Executive Order dated October 30, 2023 (relating to safe, secure, and trustworthy development and use of artificial intelligence).

(d) Access to proprietary models.—In carrying out this section, the Director shall establish such mechanisms as the Director considers appropriate, including potential contractual incentives, to ensure the provision of access to proprietary models by qualified independent third-party researchers if commercial model vendors have voluntarily provided models and associated resources for such testing.

(e) Counter-artificial intelligence defined.—In this section, the term “counter-artificial intelligence” means techniques or procedures to extract information about the behavior or characteristics of an artificial intelligence system, or to learn how to manipulate an artificial intelligence system, in order to subvert the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of an artificial intelligence system or adjacent system.