SEC. 6504. ANNUAL REPORT ON CONCENTRATED REEDUCATION CAMPS IN THE XINJIANG UYGHUR AUTONOMOUS REGION OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA.

(a) Definitions.--In this section:
	(1) Appropriate committees of congress.--The term ``appropriate committees of Congress'' means--
		(A) the congressional intelligence committees;
		(B) the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate; and
		(C) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Financial Services, and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.
	(2) Covered camp.--The term covered camp'' means a detention camp, prison, forced labor camp, or forced labor factory located in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region of the People's Republic of China, referred to by the Government of the People's Republic of China as concentrated reeducation camps'' or ``vocational training centers''.

(b) Annual Report Required.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for 5 years, the Director of National Intelligence, in consultation with such heads of elements of the intelligence community as the Director considers appropriate, shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report on the status of covered camps.
(c) Elements.--Each report required by subsection (b) shall include the following:
	(1) An identification of the number and geographic location of covered camps and an estimate of the number of victims detained in covered camps.
	(2) A description of--
		(A) the types of personnel and equipment in covered camps;
		(B) the funding received by covered camps from the Government of the People's Republic of China; and
		(C) the role of the security services of the People's Republic of China and the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps in enforcing atrocities at covered camps.
	(3) A comprehensive list of--
		(A) the entities of the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps, including subsidiaries and affiliated businesses, with respect to which sanctions have been imposed by the United States;
		(B) commercial activities of those entities outside of the People's Republic of China; and
		(C) other Chinese businesses, including in the artificial intelligence, biotechnology, and surveillance technology sectors, that are involved with the atrocities in Xinjiang or supporting the policies of the People's Republic of China in the region.

(d) Form.--Each report required by subsection (b) shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.

(e) Publication.--The unclassified portion of each report required by subsection (b) shall be published on the publicly accessible website of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence.