SEC. 6513. LEAD INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY COORDINATOR FOR COUNTERING AND NEUTRALIZING PROLIFERATION OF IRAN-ORIGIN UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS.

(a) Definitions.--In this section:
	(1) Appropriate committees of congress.--The term ``appropriate committees of Congress'' means--
		(A) the congressional intelligence committees;
		(B) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on Foreign Relations, and the Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate; and
		(C) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and the Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.
	(2) Five eyes partnership.--The term ``Five Eyes Partnership'' means the intelligence alliance comprising Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
	(3) Unmanned aircraft system.--The term ``unmanned aircraft system'' includes an unmanned powered aircraft (including communication links and the components that control the unmanned aircraft), that--
		(A) does not carry a human operator;
		(B) may fly autonomously or be piloted remotely;
		(C) may be expendable or recoverable; and
		(D) may carry a lethal payload or explode upon reaching a designated location.
(b) Coordinator.--
	(1) Designation.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of National Intelligence shall designate an official from an element of the intelligence community to serve as the lead intelligence community coordinator for countering and neutralizing the proliferation of Iran-origin unmanned aircraft systems (in this section referred to as the ``Coordinator'').
	(2) Plan.--Not later than 120 days after the date on which the Coordinator is designated under paragraph (1), the Coordinator shall--
		(A) develop a comprehensive plan of action, driven by intelligence information, for countering and neutralizing the threats posed by the proliferation of Iran-origin unmanned aircraft systems; and
		(B) provide to appropriate committees of Congress a briefing on such plan of action.
	(3) Final report.--
		(A) Submission.--Not later than January 1, 2024, the Director of National Intelligence shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a final report on the activities and findings of the Coordinator.
		(B) Matters.--The report under subparagraph (A) shall include the following:
			(i) An assessment of the threats posed by Iran-origin unmanned aircraft systems, including the threat to facilities and personnel of the United States Government in the greater Middle East, particularly in the areas of such region that are located within the area of responsibility of the Commander of the United States Central Command.
			(ii) A detailed description of intelligence sharing efforts, as well as other joint efforts driven by intelligence information, with allies and partners of the United States, to assist in countering and neutralizing of such threats.
			(iii) Recommendations for any changes in United States policy or legislative authorities to improve the capacity of the intelligence community to assist in countering and neutralizing such threats.
		(C) Form.--The report under subparagraph (A) may be submitted in classified form.
		(D) Annex.--In submitting the report under subparagraph (A) to the congressional intelligence committees, the Director shall also include an accompanying annex, which shall be classified, that separately details all efforts supported exclusively by National Intelligence Program funds.
(c) Collaboration With Five Eyes Partnership and Israel.--Taking into account the findings of the final report under subsection (b)(3), the Director of National Intelligence shall seek to--
	(1) develop and implement a common approach among the Five Eyes Partnership toward countering the threats posed by Iran-
origin unmanned aircraft systems, including by leveraging the unique intelligence capabilities and information of the members of the Five Eyes Partnership; and
	(2) intensify cooperation with Israel for the purpose of countering Iran-origin unmanned aircraft systems, including by strengthening and expanding existing cooperative efforts conducted pursuant to section 1278 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 133 Stat. 1702; 22 U.S.C. 8606 note).

(d) Sunset.--This section shall cease to have effect on the date on which the final report is submitted under subsection (b)(3).