SEC. 1534. DIGITAL SANDBOX ENVIRONMENTS FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.
    (a) Requirement To Establish.--Not later than April 1, 2026, the 
Secretary of Defense shall, acting through the Chief Digital and 
Artificial Intelligence Officer of the Department of Defense, establish 
a task force on artificial intelligence sandbox environments (in this 
section referred to as the ``Task Force'').
    (b) Purpose.--The Task Force shall identify, coordinate, and 
advance Department of Defense-wide efforts to develop and deploy 
artificial intelligence sandbox environments necessary to support 
artificial intelligence experimentation, training, familiarization, and 
development across the Department of Defense. Such artificial 
intelligence sandbox environments shall--
        (1) be designed for use by personnel with varying levels of 
    technical proficiency, from personnel with little technical 
    proficiency to personnel with expert technical proficiency;
        (2) enable the building, training, evaluation, and deployment 
    of artificial intelligence models;
        (3) facilitate familiarity with and utilization of existing 
    artificial intelligence capabilities; and
        (4) accelerate the responsible adoption of artificial 
    intelligence across the Department.
    (c) Chair.--The Task Force shall be chaired by the Chief Digital 
and Artificial Intelligence Officer of the Department of Defense.
    (d) Composition.--The Task Force shall be composed of--
        (1) the Chief Information Officer of the Department of Defense;
        (2) the chief artificial intelligence officers of the military 
    departments, or in the absence of such position, the individual 
    responsible for leading artificial intelligence efforts within each 
    military department;
        (3) the chief information officers of the military departments;
        (4) the chief artificial intelligence officers of the combatant 
    commands and joint staff, or in the absence of such position, the 
    individual responsible for leading artificial intelligence efforts 
    within each combatant command;
        (5) the chief information officers of the combatant commands, 
    and joint staff, or in the absence of such position, the individual 
    responsible for leading information technology efforts within each 
    combatant command;
        (6) the Directors for Command, Control, Communications, and 
    Computers/Cyber of the combatant commands, or their designees;
        (7) the Director for Command, Control, Communications, and 
    Computers/Cyber of the Joint Staff, or their designee; and
        (8) such other officials of the Department of Defense as the 
    chair of the Task Force consider appropriate.
    (e) Functions.--The Task Force shall--
        (1) identify and consolidate common requirements with respect 
    to artificial intelligence sandbox environments across the 
    Department of Defense, including requirements relating to 
    interfaces for users with varying technical proficiency, 
    computational resources and infrastructure, pre-trained models and 
    datasets, and educational and training materials;
        (2) identify, inventory, and ensure the availability of 
    existing solutions and technical documentation and repositories for 
    applicable artificial intelligence sandbox environments, including 
    machine-readable documents, reference architectures, and user 
    guides;
        (3) develop and make available to users of artificial 
    intelligence sandbox environments in the Department an analysis 
    matching common requirements identified under paragraph (1) with 
    existing solutions identified under paragraph (2);
        (4) use existing mechanisms of the Department to achieve 
    efficiencies in costs and productivity through enterprise licenses 
    and contracts;
        (5) identify and, where possible, streamline authority to 
    operate approvals for each element of common artificial 
    intelligence sandbox environment architectures; and
        (6) make available to the users described in paragraph (3) 
    guidance on the appropriate use of artificial intelligence sandbox 
    environments of the Department for users at all levels of technical 
    proficiency.
    (f) Briefing.--Not later than August 1, 2026, the chair of the Task 
Force shall provide to the congressional defense committees a briefing 
on the goals and objectives of the Task Force.
    (g) Termination.--The Task Force shall terminate on January 1, 
2030.
    (h) Definitions.--In this section:
        (1) The term ``artificial intelligence'' has the meaning given 
    such term in section 238(g) of the John S. McCain National Defense 
    Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 
    U.S.C. note prec. 4061).
        (2) The term ``artificial intelligence sandbox environment'' 
    means a secure, isolated computing environment that enables users 
    with varying levels of technical proficiency to access artificial 
    intelligence tools, models, and capabilities for the purposes of 
    experimentation, training, testing, and development without 
    affecting operational systems or requiring specialized technical 
    knowledge to operate.
        (3) The term ``authority to operate'' means the official 
    management decision given by a senior organizational official to 
    authorize operation of an information system and to explicitly 
    accept the risk to organizational operations and assets, 
    individuals, other organizations, and the United States based on 
    the implementation of an agreed-upon set of security controls, as 
    defined in Committee on National Security Systems Instruction 4009, 
    or successor document.
        (4) The term ``military department'' has the meaning given such 
    term in section 101(a) of title 10, United States Code.