SEC. 6603. APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE POLICIES OF THE 
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY TO PUBLICLY AVAILABLE MODELS HOSTED IN 
CLASSIFIED ENVIRONMENTS.
    (a) In General.--Section 6702 of the Intelligence Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2023 (50 U.S.C. 3334m), as amended by section 6602 of 
this Act, is further amended--
        (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``subsection (c)'' and 
    inserting ``subsection (e)'';
        (2) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (e); and
        (3) by inserting after subsection (b) the following:
    ``(c) Application of Policies to Publicly Available Models Hosted 
in Classified Environments.--In carrying out subsections (a) and (b), 
the Director shall ensure that the policies established under such 
subsections apply to the greatest extent possible to artificial 
intelligence models generally available to the public and hosted in 
classified environments.
    ``(d) Testing Standards and Benchmarks.--
        ``(1) Establishment.--The Chief Artificial Intelligence Officer 
    of the Intelligence Community, or any officer designated by the 
    Director of National Intelligence, shall establish standards for 
    testing of artificial intelligence models in proportion to risk, 
    including benchmarks and methodologies for the performance, 
    efficacy, safety, fairness, transparency, accountability, 
    appropriateness, lawfulness, and trustworthiness of artificial 
    intelligence models across common use cases, including machine 
    translation, object detection, and object recognition.
        ``(2) Identification of computing model.--The Chief Artificial 
    Intelligence Officer of the Intelligence Community, in coordination 
    with the Chief Artificial Intelligence Officers of the elements of 
    the intelligence community, shall set standards for an appropriate 
    secure computing environment, at a level (or multiple levels) of 
    classification deemed appropriate, for elements of the intelligence 
    community to engage in testing and evaluation of models prior to 
    acquisition.''.
    (b) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in subsection (c) or (d) of 
section 6702 of the Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023 
(50 U.S.C. 3334m), as added by subsection (a)(3) of this section, shall 
be construed--
        (1) to authorize an officer or employee of the intelligence 
    community to direct a vendor or prospective vendor to alter a model 
    to favor a particular viewpoint; or
        (2) to apply to, limit, restrict, or otherwise affect any 
    department, agency, or division or function of a department or 
    agency outside of the intelligence community.
    (c) Updates.--The Director shall make such revisions to the 
policies issued under subsections (a) and (b) of section 6702 of such 
Act as the Director considers necessary.