SEC. 7335. UNCREWED SYSTEMS CAPABILITIES REPORT.
    (a) In General.--
        (1) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
    of this Act, the Commandant shall submit to the Committee on 
    Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives 
    and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the 
    Senate a report that outlines a plan for establishing an uncrewed 
    systems capabilities office within the Coast Guard responsible for 
    the acquisition and development of uncrewed system and counter-
    uncrewed system technologies and to expand the capabilities of the 
    Coast Guard with respect to such technologies.
        (2) Contents.--The report required under paragraph (1) shall 
    include the following:
            (A) A management strategy for the acquisition, development, 
        and deployment of uncrewed system and counter-uncrewed system 
        technologies.
            (B) A service-wide coordination strategy to synchronize and 
        integrate efforts across the Coast Guard in order to--
                (i) support the primary duties of the Coast Guard 
            pursuant to section 102 of title 14, United States Code; 
            and
                (ii) pursue expanded research, development, testing, 
            and evaluation opportunities and funding to expand and 
            accelerate identification and transition of uncrewed system 
            and counter-uncrewed system technologies.
            (C) The identification of contracting and acquisition 
        authorities needed to expedite the development and deployment 
        of uncrewed system and counter-uncrewed system technologies.
            (D) A detailed list of commercially available uncrewed 
        system and counter-uncrewed system technologies with 
        capabilities determined to be useful for the Coast Guard.
            (E) A cross-agency collaboration plan to engage with the 
        Department of Defense and other relevant agencies to identify 
        common requirements and opportunities to partner in acquiring, 
        contracting, and sustaining uncrewed system and counter-
        uncrewed system capabilities.
            (F) Opportunities to obtain and share uncrewed system data 
        from government and commercial sources to improve maritime 
        domain awareness.
            (G) The development of a concept of operations for a data 
        system that supports and integrates uncrewed system and 
        counter-uncrewed system technologies with key enablers, 
        including enterprise communications networks, data storage and 
        management, artificial intelligence and machine learning tools, 
        and information sharing and dissemination capabilities.
    (b) Briefings.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, and annually thereafter for a period of 3 years, the 
Commandant, in coordination with the Administrator of the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the Executive Director of the 
Office of Naval Research, the Director of the National Science 
Foundation, and the Director of the White House Office of Science and 
Technology Policy, shall brief the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Transportation and 
Infrastructure of the House of Representatives, on the future operation 
and governance of small uncrewed maritime systems.
    (c) Definitions.--In this section:
        (1) Counter-uncrewed system.--The term ``counter-uncrewed 
    system''--
            (A) means a system or device capable of lawfully and safely 
        disabling, disrupting, or seizing control of an uncrewed 
        system; and
            (B) includes a counter-UAS system (as such term is defined 
        in section 44801 of title 49, United States Code).
        (2) Uncrewed system.--The term ``uncrewed system''--
            (A) means an uncrewed surface, undersea, or aircraft system 
        and associated elements (including communication links and the 
        components that control the uncrewed system) that are required 
        for the operator to operate the system safely and efficiently; 
        and
            (B) includes an unmanned aircraft system (as such term is 
        defined in section 44801 of title 49, United States Code).