H. R. 6806


To provide for the establishment of a program to certify artificial intelligence software used in connection with producing agricultural products.


IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES


December 14, 2023


Mr. Feenstra (for himself, Mr. Valadao, and Mr. Sorensen) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Agriculture


A BILL
To provide for the establishment of a program to certify artificial intelligence software used in connection with producing agricultural products.


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.


This Act may be cited as the “Farm Tech Act”.SEC. 2. CERTIFICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE SOFTWARE USED IN CONNECTION WITH PRODUCING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS.


(a) In General.—The Secretary of Agriculture shall establish a program to certify software that uses artificial intelligence in the performing a task in connection with producing agricultural products. The program shall be based on the Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology.


(b) Certification.—The Secretary may only certify software under the program established under subsection (a) if, in the performing a task in connection with producing an agricultural product, the software—


(1) performs accurately, and


(2) consistently meets or exceeds the Federal and State licensure, certification, and permitting standards applicable to a person performing the task.


(c) Licensure, Certification, And Permitting Standards.—For purposes of this section, the licensure, certification, and permitting standards applicable to the performance of a task shall be the following:


(1) The requirements for a commercial driver’s license in the State of use in the case of a self-driving trucks, light duty vehicles, tractors, combines, and threshers.


(2) The requirements applicable to manure applicators in the case of manure application machinery.


(3) The requirements for commercial pesticide applicators in the case of pesticide applications.


(4) The requirements for handling hazardous materials in the case of hazardous materials.


(5) The requirements for the care of livestock in the case of automated software and implements for care of livestock.


(6) The requirements for commercial animal dealers in the case of software used in connection with applicable functions of a commercial animal dealer.


(7) The requirements relating to a veterinary purpose in the case of software used in connection with the applicable veterinary purpose.


(8) The requirements for any other task performed in connection with agriculture, as determined by the Secretary.


(d) Agricultural Products.—For purposes of this section, the term “agricultural products” has the meaning given such term by section 207 of the Agricultural Marketing Act of 1946 (7 U.S.C. 1626).


(e) Regulations.—The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out this section.