AN ACT to amend the Indiana Code concerning criminal law and procedure.


Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Indiana:


SECTION 1. IC 34-11-2-4, AS AMENDED BY P.L.44-2013, SECTION 1,IS AMENDED TO READ AS FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE UPON PASSAGE]: Sec. 4. (a) An action for:
(1) injury to person or character;
(2) injury to personal property; or
(3) a forfeiture of penalty given by statute; must be commenced within two (2) years after the cause of action accrues.


(b) Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d), an action for injury to a person that results from the sexual abuse of a child must be commenced within the later of:
(1) seven (7) years after the cause of action accrues; or
(2) four (4) years after the person ceases to be a dependent of the person alleged to have performed the sexual abuse.


(c) An action for injury to a person that:
(1) results from the sexual abuse of a child;
(2) is barred due to the expiration of the statute of limitations period described in subsection (b); and
(3) is brought against a congressionally chartered organization that was incorporated before June 16, 1916; may be commenced in accordance with subsection (d).


(d) An action described in subsection (c) may be commenced before July 1, 2025, by a person who, before January 1, 2024, participated in a bankruptcy proceeding or bankruptcy settlement that:
(1) was initiated on February 18, 2020; and
(2) involved the organization described in subsection (c)(3).


SECTION 2. IC 34-21.5-2-1, AS ADDED BY P.L.29-2019,SECTION 4,IS AMENDED TO READ AS FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE JULY1, 2024]: Sec. 1. The following definitions applythroughout this article:


(1)"Computer generatedimage"means aphotograph,digital image, or video of an individual created or modifiedby means of a computer software program, artificial intelligence, application, or other design editing tools.


(2) "Disclosure" means display, transfer, publication, or distribution to another person.


(3) "Distribute" means to transfer to another person in, or by means of, any medium, forum, telecommunications device or network, or Internet web site.


(4) "Harm" includes:
(A) physical harm;
(B) economic harm; and
(C) emotional distress, whether or not accompanied by physical or economic harm.


(5) "Identifiable" means recognizable by a person other than the depicted individual:
(A) from an intimate image itself; or
(B) from an intimate image and identifying characteristic disclosed in connection with the intimate image.


(6) "Intimate image" means a photograph, digital image, computer generated image, or video that depicts:
(A) an individual engaging in sexual intercourse;
(B) an individual engaging in othersexual conduct(as defined in IC 35-31.5-2-221.5); or
(C) the exhibition of the uncovered buttocks, genitals, or female breast of an individual.


SECTION 3. IC 35-45-4-5, AS AMENDED BY P.L.142-2020,SECTION 72,IS AMENDED TO READ AS FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2024]: Sec. 5. (a) The following definitions apply throughout this section:
(1) "Camera" means a camera, a video camera, a device that captures a digital image, or any other type of video recording device.
(2) "Peep" means:
(A) any looking of a clandestine, surreptitious, prying, or secretive nature; or
(B) using a concealed camera with the intent of capturing an intimate image (as defined by IC 34-21.5-2-1).
(3) "Private area"meansthe naked or undergarment clad genitals, pubic area, or buttocks of an individual.


(b) A person:
(1) who knowingly or intentionally:
(A) peeps; or
(B) goes upon the land of another with the intent to peep; into an occupied dwelling of another person; or
(2) who knowingly or intentionallypeepsin or into an area where an occupant of the area reasonably can be expected to disrobe or is actually expected to disrobe, including:
(A) restrooms;
(B) baths;
(C) showers; and
(D) dressing rooms; without the consent of the other person, commits voyeurism, a Class B misdemeanor.


(c) However, the offense undersubsection (b) is a Level 6 felony if:
(1) it is knowingly or intentionally committed by means of a camera; or
(2) the person who commits the offense has a prior unrelated conviction under this section.


(d) A person who:
(1) without the consent of the individual; and
(2) with intent to peep at the private area of an individual; peeps at the private area of an individual and records an image by means of a camera commits public voyeurism, a Class A misdemeanor.


(e) The offense undersubsection (d) is aLevel 6 felonyifthe person has a prior unrelated conviction under this section or if the person:
(1) publishes the image;
(2) makes the image available on the Internet; or
(3) transmits or disseminates the image to another person.


(f) It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (d) that the individual deliberately exposed the individual's private area.


(g) A person who, with the intent to peep, operates an unmanned aerial vehicle in a mannerthat is intended to cause the unmanned aerial vehicle to enter the space above or surrounding another person's occupied dwelling for the purpose of capturing images, photographs, video recordings, or audio recordings of the other person while the other person is:
(1) within the other person's occupied dwelling; or
(2) on the land or premises:
(A) on which the other person's occupied dwelling is located; and
(B) in a location that is not visible from an area:
(i) open to the general public; or
(ii) where a member ofthe general public hasthe right to be; commits remote aerial voyeurism, a Class A misdemeanor.


(h)The offense undersubsection (g)is a Level 6 felony if the person has a prior unrelated conviction under this section or if the person:
(1) publishes the images, photographs, or recordings captured;
(2) makes the images, photographs, or recordings captured available on the Internet; or
(3) transmits or disseminates the images, photographs, or recordings captured to another person.


SECTION 4. IC 35-45-4-8, AS ADDED BY P.L.185-2019, SECTION 3, IS AMENDED TO READ AS FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2024]: Sec. 8. (a) This section does not apply to:
(1) a photograph, digital image, or video that is distributed:
(A) to report a possible criminal act;
(B) in connection with a criminal investigation;
(C) under a court order; or
(D) to a location that is:
(i) intended solely for the storage or backup of personal data, including photographs, digital images, and video; and
(ii) password protected; or
(E) by a news reporting or an entertainment medium (as defined in IC 32-36-1-4);
(2) a newspaper or news service that publishes news related information through a website;
(3) a cloud service provider; or
(4) an Internet provider, an affiliate or subsidiary of an Internet provider, or a search engine that:
(A) solely provides access or connection to a website or other Internet content that is not under the control of that Internet service provider, affiliate or subsidiary, or search engine; and
(B)is not responsible for creating or publishing the content that constitutes material harmful to minors.


(b) As used in thissection, "distribute" meansto transfer to another person in, or by means of, any medium, forum, telecommunications device or network, or Internet web site, website, including posting an image on an Internet web site a website or application.


(c) As used in this section, "intimate image" means a photograph, digital image, computer generated image, or video:
(1) that depicts:
(A) sexual intercourse;
(B) other sexual conduct (as defined in IC 35-31.5-2-221.5); or
(C) exhibition of the uncovered buttocks, genitals, or female breast; of an individual; and
(2) taken, captured, created, disseminated, or recorded by:
(A) an individual depicted in the photograph, digital image, or video and given ortransmitted directlyto the person described in subsection (d); or
(B) the person described in subsection (d) in the physical presence of an individual depicted in the photograph, digital image, or video; or
(C) the person described in subsection (d) with respect to a photograph,digital image, computer generated image, or video of an individual created or modified by means of a computer software program, artificial intelligence, application, or other digital editing tools; and
(3) that is of a quality, characteristic, or condition such that it appears to depict the alleged victim.


(d) A person who:
(1) knows or reasonably should know that an individual depicted in an intimate image does not consent to the distribution of the intimate image; and
(2) distributes the intimate image; commits distribution of an intimate image, a Class A misdemeanor. However, the offense is a Level 6 felony if the person has a prior unrelated conviction under this section.


(e) It is not a necessary element of the offense described in subsection (d) that the individual depicted in the intimate image actually sent the image.
SECTION 5. An emergency is declared for this act.