AN ACT to amend Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 49, relative to artificial intelligence. 


BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF TENNESSEE: 


SECTION 1. Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 49, Chapter 7, Part 1, is amended by adding the following as a new section: 


(a) As used in this section, "artificial intelligence" means a machine-based system that can, for a given set of human-defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual environments and that is capable of using machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and virtual environments, abstract such perceptions into models through analysis in an automated manner, and use model inference to formulate options for information or action. 


(b) The board of trustees of the University of Tennessee, the board of regents, and each local governing board of trustees of a state university shall adopt a policy regarding the use of artificial intelligence technology by students, faculty, and staff for instructional and assignment purposes. The policy must be implemented no later than July 1, 2025. The Uniform Administrative Procedures Act, compiled in title 4, chapter 5, does not apply to a policy adopted pursuant to this subsection (b ). 


(c) Public institutions of higher education are encouraged to collaborate in the development and implementation of policies regarding the use of artificial intelligence technology pursuant to subsection (b ). 


(d) The board of trustees of the University of Tennessee, the board of regents, and each local governing board of trustees of a state university shall post the policy adopted pursuant to subsection (b) on the institution's website and submit the policy to the chair of the education committee of the • senate and the chair of the education administration committee of the house of representatives no later than July 1, 2025. If the governing board of a public institution of higher education fails to adopt and submit a policy as required .bY this section, then the governing board for the respective institution must appear before the joint government operations committee no later than sixty (60) days after July 1, 2025, to report on the governing board's noncompliance. 


SECTION 2. Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 49-2-203(a), is amended by adding the following as a new subdivision: 


( ) Adopt a policy regarding the use of artificial intelligence by students, teachers, and staff for instructional and assignment purposes. The policy must be implemented in schools no later than the 2024-2025 school year. By July 1, 2024, and by each July 1 thereafter, the board shall report to the department of education of its compliance with this subdivision (a)(). The report must include the adopted policy and describe how the board will enforce the policy in the upcoming school year. As used in this subdivision (a)( ), "artificial intelligence" means a machine-based system that can, for a given set of human-defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual environments and that is capable of using machine and human-based inputs to perceive . real and virtual environments, abstract such perceptions into models through analysis in an automated manner, and use model inference to formulate options for information or action. 


SECTION 3. Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 49, Chapter 13, is amended by adding the following as a new section: 


(a) As used in this section, "artificial intelligence" means a machine-based system that can, for a given set of human-defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual environments and that is capable of using machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and virtual environments, abstract such perceptions into models through analysis in an automated manner, and use model inference to formulate options for information or action. 


(b) The governing body of a public charter school shall adopt a policy regarding the use of artificial intelligence by students, teachers, and staff for instructional and assignment purposes. The policy must be implemented in each public charter school no later than the 2024-2025 school year. By July 1, 2024, and by each July 1 thereafter, the governing body shall report to the department of education of its compliance with this section. The report must include the adopted policy and describe how the governing body will enforce the policy in the upcoming school year. 


SECTION 4. This act takes effect upon becoming a law, the public welfare requiring it.