Part 13. Innovation in Artificial Intelligence Grant Pilot Program
Section 29, Section 63N-3-1301 is enacted to read:

63N-3-1301. Definitions.  As used in this part:
(1) "Business entity" means a for-profit or nonprofit organization.
(2) "Pilot program" means the Innovation in Artificial Intelligence Grant Pilot Program
created in Section 63N-3-1302.
(3) "Student" means a child enrolled in a public or private school, grades kindergarten
through twelfth grade.


Section 30, Section 63N-3-1302 is enacted to read:

63N-3-1302. Innovation in Artificial Intelligence Grant Pilot Program created --
Purpose -- Requirements -- Report.
(1) There is created the Innovation in Artificial Intelligence Grant Pilot Program, to be
administered subject to the availability of funds by the office as described in this section.
(2) (a) The purpose of the pilot program is to award a grant to a business entity to
develop a program, material, and curriculum to:
(i) teach a course on artificial intelligence to students, with an emphasis on practical
training; and
(ii) prepare students for career opportunities in technology.
(b) A business entity that is awarded a grant under this section shall work in partnership
with a public or private school.
(3) A business entity that submits an application for a grant to the office shall include the
following details in the application:
(a) how the business entity proposes to fulfill the purpose described in Subsection (2)(a);
(b) how the business entity proposes to work with a public or private school, as
described in Subsection (2)(b); and
(c) any existing or planned partnership between the business entity and another
individual or business entity to implement the proposal in the application.
(4) In evaluating an application for a grant, the office shall consider:
(a) the likelihood that the business entity's proposal will accomplish the purpose
described in Subsection (2)(a); and
(b) the overall viability of the proposal.
(5) Before a business entity that has an approved application for a grant may receive grant
funds, the business entity shall enter into a written agreement with the office that
specifies:
(a) the grant amount; and
(b) the time period and structure for distribution of grant funds, including any terms and
conditions the office requires.
(6) The office may make rules in accordance with Title 63G, Chapter 3, Utah
Administrative Rulemaking Act, to administer the pilot program, including:
(a) establishing criteria and procedures for applying for and awarding a grant under this
section; and
(b) reporting requirements from a business entity after a grant is awarded.
(7) The office shall include an annual written update on the pilot program in the report
described in Section 63N-1a-306.