§ 892.2060 Radiological computer-assisted diagnostic software for lesions suspicious of cancer.

(a) Identification.

A radiological computer-assisted diagnostic software for lesions suspicious of cancer is an image processing prescription device intended to aid in the characterization of lesions as suspicious for cancer identified on acquired medical images such as magnetic resonance, mammography, radiography, or computed tomography. The device characterizes lesions based on features or information extracted from the images and provides information about the lesion(s) to the user. Diagnostic and patient management decisions are made by the clinical user.

(b) Classification.

Class II (special controls). The special controls for this device are:

(1) Design verification and validation must include:

(i) A detailed description of the image analysis algorithms including, but not limited to, a detailed description of the algorithm inputs and outputs, each major component or block, and algorithm limitations.

(ii) A detailed description of pre-specified performance testing protocols and dataset(s) used to assess whether the device will improve reader performance as intended.

(iii) Results from performance testing protocols that demonstrate that the device improves reader performance in the intended use population when used in accordance with the instructions for use. The performance assessment must be based on appropriate diagnostic accuracy measures (e.g., receiver operator characteristic plot, sensitivity, specificity, predictive value, and diagnostic likelihood ratio). The test dataset must contain sufficient numbers of cases from important cohorts (e.g., subsets defined by clinically relevant confounders, effect modifiers, concomitant diseases, and subsets defined by image acquisition characteristics) such that the performance estimates and confidence intervals of the device for these individual subsets can be characterized for the intended use population and imaging equipment.

(iv) Standalone performance testing protocols and results of the device.

(v) Appropriate software documentation (e.g., device hazard analysis; software requirements specification document; software design specification document; traceability analysis; and description of verification and validation activities including system level test protocol, pass/fail criteria, results, and cybersecurity).

(2) Labeling must include:

(i) A detailed description of the patient population for which the device is indicated for use.

(ii) A detailed description of the intended reading protocol.

(iii) A detailed description of the intended user and recommended user training.

(iv) A detailed description of the device inputs and outputs.

(v) A detailed description of compatible imaging hardware and imaging protocols.

(vi) Warnings, precautions, and limitations, including situations in which the device may fail or may not operate at its expected performance level (e.g., poor image quality or for certain subpopulations), as applicable.

(vii) Detailed instructions for use.

(viii) A detailed summary of the performance testing, including: Test methods, dataset characteristics, results, and a summary of sub-analyses on case distributions stratified by relevant confounders (e.g., lesion and organ characteristics, disease stages, and imaging equipment).