Overview: Data privacy and security are core values of our organization. To successfully provide a
high quality of life for those that live, work, and play in Long Beach, it is critical that we build public
trust through excellence in data privacy, data security, and community engagement. The following
Data Privacy Guidelines assert the City’s core values on protecting the privacy and information
security of our constituents. They are intended to provide a framework to help the City and partners
incorporate privacy by design as we deploy new technologies and new services in Long Beach.
Note: The California Consumer Protection Act (CCPA), which went into effect January 1, 2020,
provides a set of consumer rights governing data collection requirements for businesses. It does not
apply to public agencies at this time, though City vendors that meet CCPA eligibility requirements
must comply. The City supports the intent behind the CCPA (and subsequent amendments such as
the California Privacy Rights Act which passed in November 2020), and we strive to adhere to the
guidelines below which are based upon CCPA requirements. The City is also required to comply with
data transparency laws such as the California Public Records Act, which provides fundamental rights
to the public to access government information.
Key Terms:
• Data privacy: The practices taken to govern the collection, protection, and sharing of personal
and confidential information.
• Smart city: A city that uses emerging technology and data to manage complex city
operations, efficiently deliver services, and improve the quality of life.
• Equity: When everyone can achieve their highest quality of life no matter their background.
Often used in the context of race.
• Personally identifiable information (PII): Data that can be used to distinguish or trace an
individual’s identity, either alone or when combined with other personal data.
• Algorithm: A process or set of rules that a computer needs to do to complete a task.
• Artificial intelligence (AI): Machines that have the ability to “learn” and “problem solve.”
• Data stewardship: The management and oversight of data to help provide individuals with
high-quality data that is easily accessible in a consistent manner.
Purpose: Every day, Long Beach residents, visitors, and business owners trade personal privacy for
convenience. For example, a City app that allows you pay for parking with your phone could also
transmit anonymized data to City officials to better manage demand for parking. As smart city
technologies become more commonplace, the City and its vendors will inevitably collect data that if
not managed properly may put certain communities and individuals at risk. These technologies aren’t
inherently good or bad, however through their design and implementation, they can be exploited to
do harm. In particular, underserved and marginalized communities face disproportionately negative
impacts from misuse of data.
The Data Privacy Guidelines are meant to augment – not replace - existing laws, rules, and
regulations that apply to our technology projects and services. The City values privacy as an
expectation and given right, and will advocate for our constituents to have greater control over the
collection and use of their personal information.
Methodology: The City’s Technology & Innovation Department worked closely with the resident-led
Technology & Innovation Commission to develop the Data Privacy Guidelines. City staff and
Commissioners led over 20 focus groups, workshops, and interviews with key community-based
organizations and stakeholders. The Commission also developed a multi-lingual Data Privacy Survey,
which yielded over 450 responses on residents’ data privacy preferences. 
What’s Next: The Data Privacy Guidelines represent a first step towards operationalizing privacy in
our City programs, technology projects, and services. Following the adoption of these Guidelines, the
City will provide technical guidance to all City Departments and continue to work with appropriate
City Commissions, Long Beach residents, and other local stakeholders to embed these guidelines
within City policies, contracts, procedures, trainings, educational campaigns (for both City staff and
Long Beach residents), software applications, and legacy systems.
The City will advocate for state and federal legislation consistent with these Guidelines, and revisit
and update these Guidelines on a recurring basis.
Guidelines: The City of Long Beach and its partners will strive to uphold the following Data Privacy
Guidelines:
1. Long Beach will be publicly transparent and accountable in its collection and management
practices of personal data, notwithstanding data requirements mandated by law. This
pertains to both intended and potential uses of data, as well as data collection changes over
time. The City will solicit individuals’ consent when their information is being collected and
used. Information will be provided in non-technical language and in English, Spanish,
Tagalog, and Khmer in compliance with the City’s Language Access Policy.
2. Long Beach will work to provide participatory, responsive feedback channels for residents
to inform the City’s data collection and usage practices, exercise privacy complaints, and
ensure the City is held accountable to these Guidelines. The City will equitably educate
communities on its data privacy practices and inform residents how and why the City may be
using personal data.
3. Long Beach will advance digital equity and prioritize the needs of marginalized
communities on matters pertaining to data and information management. The City will enable
underserved Long Beach communities to harness digital opportunities and will prioritize
these same communities in providing access to data privacy protections.
4. Long Beach will use data in an ethical and non-discriminatory manner to not reinforce
existing racial biases and prejudiced decision-making. Emerging technology promises many
benefits, but may exclude, harm, and even criminalize already marginalized populations if not
carefully managed.
a. Long Beach will leverage a racial equity lens to examine the burdens, benefits, and
unintended consequences of data collected for technology projects and applications.
The City will practice data integrity and use data for stated and public purposes.
b. Long Beach will never sell, or permit vendors to sell, personally identifiable
information (PII) data to third parties and will only use collected data to serve the
public good and to bring value to our communities. Long Beach will limit collection
and sharing of personal data for only purposes which are directly relevant and
necessary to accomplish a clearly-communicated purpose. This extends to data
sharing between third parties. Long Beach will never share PII data with independent
third parties without first soliciting individuals’ consent unless we are legally required
to do so in connection with law enforcement investigations, mandatory contractual
obligations, Public Records Act (PRA) requirements, or other legal proceedings. In
these cases where the City must disclose PII as required by law, Long Beach will 
work to provide notice to affected individuals where possible unless doing so
compromises a law enforcement investigation.
c. Long Beach will ensure human review of decision frameworks made by algorithms
and AI. Algorithmic and artificial intelligence (AI) technology is increasingly complex
and mysterious. The City will use evidence-based practices to evaluate potentially
discriminatory consequences of this technology and require human involvement on
any decision-making schemas and training input that are informed by outcomes of AI,
machine learning algorithms, and related technology.
5. Long Beach will practice ethical data stewardship throughout the data lifecycle to
minimize misuse of personal data.
a. Long Beach will anonymize, deidentify, and/or aggregate personal information for
any City purposes when access to individual records is not expressly needed.
b. Long Beach will work to ensure residents can access and correct their personal
data and provide individuals with the ability to opt out of data collection (without
jeopardizing City service quality) when it is not required for a City service.
c. Long Beach will securely retain and store data only as long as it is needed and in a
manner that is consistent with both applicable laws and the context in which it was
collected.