Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools have been on the news a lot lately and causing understandable excitement with their potential uses. This technology will likely have a large impact on many organizations going forward.
Generative AI tools can ingest vast amounts of information and generate content such as text, images, video, or audio, based on user prompts. This technology is also being
incorporated into common online tools such as search engines. We are advising that
employees follow these guidelines when using generative AI tools, such as ChatGPT, BingAI and Google Bard.
Since the field is so new and rapidly evolving, policy around its use and mitigation of its risks are still being evaluated. In the interim, we are communicating some guidelines around its use by City employees as part of their job.
1. Use of these tools should follow the City’s Information Technology Acceptable Use
Policy
2. Purchase of any AI related technology/software should be vetted through ITSA.
3. Security: if you’re using City email to logon to these sites, do NOT use your City
password. Unfortunately, bad actors are also using these tools to make malware
more sophisticated and thus increased awareness and caution are recommended.
4. Sensitive Information: do not utilize, upload, or include sensitive, confidential, or
personally identifiable information when using these systems.
5. Bias & Accuracy: Since these tools are still maturing and the algorithms they use are
evolving, there may be unintended bias or inaccurate information in the results
generated. Please review content and validate information provided before relying
on or publishing it.
6. Copyright and Attribution: content generated by AI systems could be protected by
copyright. Further, direct use of this type of content should also be appropriately
attributed to its source.
7. Disclosure and Public Records: note that any content generated, similar to existing
work product, could be subject to disclosure under Sunshine Law
We ask that you follow these guidelines to do your part in securing and protecting our
computing resources and intellectual property. ITSA, in conjunction with the Mayor’s
Office, will continue to evaluate its use and develop policy as appropriate.
