BEST PRACTICE AI RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR THE CITY OF LOS ANGELES

For several years, the Information Technology Agency (ITA) has been monitoring
trends and tools in artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies. In
preparation of this report, the ITA also solicited best practice research from
industry subject matter experts, Gartner Inc., a major Big 4 technology
consulting company with a specialized AI practice, professors at the University
of Southern California (USC) Viterbi School of Engineering, technology vendors,
and various periodicals. While artificial intelligence is a rapidly changing field,
the following is a summary of key recommendations for the City of Los Angeles
based on best practices in artificial intelligence as understood in the industry
today:
Recommendation #1 - L.A. City AI Tools Should Tailor to Two Distinct User
Segments
Not everyone uses AI tools in the same way. At the City of Los Angeles, there
are two distinct groups of users that we should consider and train to:
1. City Employees & Managers (AI Users) - These are the City employees
who will use AI tools that are made available to them. These tools will
most be used in Google Workspace, Salesforce, ServiceNow, or other
existing software (i.e. AI Embedded Software). In addition, a much smaller
set of City employees will use custom-developed AI tools for a specific
purpose (e.g. call center software, fraud detection, environmental
monitoring, etc). Training in basic AI usage (e.g. prompts, logic, etc) will
improve their digital skills in these tools.
2. IT Professionals (AI Developers) - These are the technical staff who
develop or configure the AI tools for City departments (i.e. configuring AI
embedded productivity software or maintaining custom AI solutions).
While smaller in number than the other segment, this group requires
technical training, an understanding of trends in the AI marketplace to
assist in tool selection, and the ability to explain the behavior of the tool
for transparency. This segment should utilize industry certifications,
specialized training, and bi-monthly IT Policy Committee
training/discussions.
Recommendation #2 - Non-Technical Department Leadership Teams
Should Set Goals & Objectives Before Deploying AI Tools
Technology can deliver real value. However, for technology to deliver value,
there must be clear department goals and objectives for those technologies
before technology investments are to be made. Without clear department goals
and objectives and engaged department non-technical staff, the technology will
easily miss the mark, result in wasted investment, and not generate the value for
the City department. Before undertaking AI projects, City departments must
start with clear mission-driven goals and objectives that can direct the
technology decisions made with these emerging technologies.
Recommendation #3 - AI Tools Should Be Piloted and Understood Before
Mass Usage
A proof of concept (PoC) is essential with emerging technologies. The PoC helps
organizations determine the strengths of the technology, the weaknesses, the
unseen costs, the maintenance requirements, refinements required before mass
usage, and potential unintended consequences. A PoC is much like trying on
clothing in a dressing room before you purchase the items. This is especially
important for artificial intelligence, which can be seen as a “black box” by many
City employees who lack familiarity with it. While a PoC reduces time to market,
it is also the best way to minimize a waste of funding or human resources.
Recommendation #4 - City Departments Must Prepare for Most AI Tools To
Be Accessed Through Existing Software Platforms (i.e. Embedded AI
Tools)
Based on best practice research, the high initial cost of AI projects, and
developments in the tech industry, most AI tools will fall into 3 categories:
1. Embedded AI Tools in Other Software - The majority of AI tool usage will
likely be embedded into existing City of Los Angeles software solutions
(e.g. Google Workspace, ServiceNow, Salesforce, etc). AI becomes an
enhanced service within this software enabling the user to perform greater
tasks and processes using the AI tools (e.g. Google Duet used to create a
custom image for a Google Slides presentation based on previous
presentations in the user’s Google Drive). This is also driven by the high
entry cost of AI projects and the need for dedicated, high quality data
(which existing software companies are best prepared to provide). In other
words, most City of Los Angeles users will be introduced to AI tools within
the context of software they are already using today.
2. Artificial Intelligence-as-a-Service (AIaaS) Cloud Services - The second
category of AI tools is the custom-development of artificial intelligence
functions using cloud-based artificial intelligence (AI) services (e.g.
Amazon Web Services, Google, Microsoft Azure). Commonly known as
“artificial intelligence as a service” (AIaaS), these are AI components that
can be subscribed to by IT developers. These tools require a significant
level of technical expertise, but are substantially easier to setup and
purchase compared to the Vendor-Built Custom AI Solutions (the third
category).
3. Vendor-Built Custom AI Solutions - The most sophisticated (and
expensive) AI solution is the Vendor-Built Custom AI Solution that is
contracted through a vendor and built by their professional services staff.
These tools would be used for a specific, niche department use case (e.g.
traffic management, fraud detection, etc). The vendor would contract with
the City department and perform a full cycle AI solution deployment
(develop requirements, gather datasets, train models, deploy tools,
monitor/refine, etc). While these will likely be the least common category
and the most expensive, these can be the most impactful tools for our
operations and L.A.’s urban challenges.
Recommendation #5 - AI Tools Should Be Dynamic & Adapt to Changes in
Department Data or Requirements
The best technology projects start with a clear set of department goals and
objectives, then a rapid/agile deployment of a “minimum viable product”
technology, and the iterative enhancement of the technology based on real
experience and feedback. AI tools should be dynamic and adaptive to improve
their accuracy and capability. In addition, AI as a Service projects and
Vendor-Build Custom AI Solutions often require a variety of AI techniques that
are better suited for the specific use case. At times, informed experimentation is
necessary to yield the necessary results.
Recommendation #6 - Organizations Should Stay Current on AI Tools &
Frameworks
AI is a rapidly evolving field and suite of tools/techniques. To maximize our
effectiveness, the City of Los Angeles should evolve with the industry. This
requires an understanding of the technology, best practices from other
governments/private sector, and upcoming product roadmaps, especially
among IT Developers who are responsible for the implementation or
configuration of these tools.
Recommendation #7 - AI Tools Require Training for Both Users &
Developers
Technology is only as good as the humans that use it. AI tools require
intermediate knowledge to use them and substantial technical expertise to
configure them. The following areas of training are recommended for City
Employees and IT Developers:
1. Suggested AI Training for City Employees
a. AI Prompts & Queries
b. Popular AI Use Cases
c. AI Privacy & Security Considerations
2. Suggested AI Training for IT Developers
a. Prompt Engineering
b. Advanced AI Use Cases
c. AI Privacy & Security for Developers (e.g. Prompt Injections)
d. Low-Code Machine Learning
e. Building Language Models
f. AI Certifications
i. Amazon Web Services
ii. Google
iii. Microsoft
Recommendation #8 - AI Tools Must Be Cyber Secure
AI tools require significant cyber security and data privacy considerations.
Hastily implemented AI tools will be vulnerable to cyber attacks and data
breaches. In addition, proprietary data can be published into public AI tools
causing challenges for data privacy and security. Cybersecurity requirements
must be incorporated early into any AI tool and cybersecurity assessments must
be performed before deployment to prevent data security issues.
Recommendation #9 - AI is a Long Term Investment & Requires Patience
Artificial Intelligence is not a “silver bullet”. It is a new technology that affords
tremendous capabilities for organizations willing to apply the effort, investment,
and discipline necessary to harness the emerging technology. This is not an
issue of technical acumen, but a broad-based effort that requires department
management, functional subject matter experts, technical professionals, and
vendors to work together towards a common goal using these new
technologies. This requires long-term investment, foundational improvements to
department data gathering, the training of AI models, department process
improvements, and AI tool refinement over an extended timeframe. This is the
experience of successful private sector organizations and governments.
Recommendation #10 - Custom AI Tools Require High Quality Data & Data
Cleanup
Artificial Intelligence is not a “cheat” technology that solves all of an
organization's process and data issues. In fact, sophisticated AI tools require
high quality data and data preparation to make them work. AI models are only as
good as the data they are trained on. City of Los Angeles departments must
take great preparatory efforts to gather clean, relevant, and accurate data for the
use of AI.
Recommendation #11 - City of Los Angeles Data is Owned by the City &
Not to be Given Away to Vendors
Data from City of Los Angeles systems is owned by the City department that
primarily uses the system or makes decisions on how the system works (i.e.
system business owner). AI tools operate on large amounts of data and vendors
will seek the use of City data to implement these tools. It is imperative that City
departments who are considering the use of AI tools clearly understand what
data will be used, how the data will be used, where it will be stored, how it will
be transmitted to the storage location, ensure data privacy controls are in place
where applicable (per City of Los Angeles Information Security Policy), and
maintain contractual ownership of that data. Contracts with vendors that utilize
City data should be reviewed by City Attorney representatives to ensure proper
contractual data ownership and controls. If not, vendors may misuse City
department data for their own benefit, place sensitive City data in insecure
locations, or violate the City’s data privacy guidelines.
Recommendation #12 - AI Tools Should Be Ethical, Transparent &
Human-Centered
City of Los Angeles technology must be used for the benefit of people that use it
or benefit from it. This is even more important with the implementation of
emerging technologies, such as AI, which are often viewed as “magical black
boxes” that generate good and bad results. All City of Los Angeles AI tools must
be understood, examined for unfair biases, transparent to their users, and
developed for the betterment of LA City employees, residents, businesses, or
visitors. This requires more than just an innovation lens, but a digital ethics lens
to ensure these advanced tools provide benefit (not harm) to our employees or
diverse communities.

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ROADMAP
FOR THE CITY OF LOS ANGELES

“AI is a tool. The choice about how it gets deployed is ours.”
-Oren Etzioni, Professor & 1st Harvard Comp Sci Major

To accomplish the City of Los Angeles objectives for artificial intelligence and
incorporate the best practice AI recommendations found above, the following
“roadmap” of next steps has been developed for the City of Los Angeles to be
completed by the Information Technology Agency and our partner City
departments. With additional investment and resources, this approach can
expand and grow based on the needs of City of Los Angeles departments and
our elected offices:
1. Provide AI Training to Employees (the “how of AI”) | May - August 2024
a. City Employee & Manager AI Literacy Training
i. Introduction to Artificial Intelligence Webinar (All Employees)
ii. Artificial Intelligence Privacy & Security (All Employees)
iii. Introduction to Google Gemini Chatbot GenAI (All Employees)
iv. Google Gemini Enterprise for Workspace Training (all employees with
Google licenses for 3 months - paid licenses required after)
v. Adobe Firefly Generative AI Training (L.A. City Designers & Content
Creators)
vi. Preventing AI Financial Fraud Training (LA City Accounting & Finance
Professionals)
b. IT Developer Training
i. Google Gemini for Developers (Pilot Group - Licenses Required)
ii. GitHub CoPilot for Developers (Pilot Group - Licenses Required)
iii. Artificial Intelligence Certifications (Optional)
1. Google Machine Learning Engineer
2. Google Generative AI Learning Path
3. AWS Certified Machine Learning
4. Microsoft Azure AI Fundamentals
2. Deliver AI Tools to City Workforce (the “what of AI”) | May-Dec’ 2024
a. Deliver Embedded AI Tools to City Employees
i. Google Gemini Enterprise for Workspace (26,500+users; 3 months) -
May ‘24
1. Google Gemini Enterprise (formerly known as Google Duet) is
Google’s AI-powered assistant to help users write, organize,
visualize, improve meetings, build workflows, etc.
2. All LA City employees with Google licenses across City
departments and elected offices will be provided training and the
ability to use Gemini Enterprise for Google Workspace for three
months free of charge (requires paid license beyond pilot
timeframe)
ii. Google Gemini Chatbot Generative AI for Employees - August ‘24
1. Google Gemini Chatbot Generative AI (formerly known as
Google Bard) is comparable to ChatGPT and creates text,
graphics, and video content
2. Google Gemini is included at no cost with the City’s Google
Workspace license and is equivalent to the paid premium
ChatGPT 4
3. All 26,500+ City employees with a Google license will be
provided training and access to use this Generative AI tool
iii. Adobe Firefly Generative AI for L.A. City Content Creators
1. Adobe Firefly is a sophisticated AI development tool to ideate,
create, and communicate for City of Los Angeles content
creators (e.g. Graphic Designers, Web Developers, etc)
2. Adobe Firefly will be trained to and turned on for all Adobe
Creative Cloud licenses, focusing on Graphic Designers, Website
Developers, and Public Information Officers
b. Pilot Additional-Cost AI Tools for IT Developers
i. Microsoft GitHub CoPilot for Developers (30 users)
1. Solicit 30 volunteers across City departments to learn and use
GitHub CoPilot for software development, focusing on
Programmer/Analysts and Systems Programmers
c. Examine More Complex AI Tools (AIaaS & Vendor-Built Custom Tools)
i. Establish plans for the research and development of high-value AI
projects, including:
1. MyLA311 mobile application AI tool
a. Implement Amazon Web Services (AWS) Vision
AI tool into the MyLA311 mobile app, allowing
residents to take a photo of an urban issue and
let the app auto-populate the category, location,
description, etc
b. Will initially focus on Top 5 most popular
MyLA311 service requests (Illegal Dumping,
Graffiti, Bulky Item Pickup, etc)
c. This functionality will be researched and
incorporated into MyLA 311 Modernization
project that will start this year
2. 3-1-1 Call Center AI Virtual Agent
a. Implement Amazon Web Services (AWS) Connect
Virtual Agent tool to assist 3-1-1 Call Center
Operators with simple service requests and
reduce call wait times during peak times
b. This functionality will researched and
incorporated into 3-1-1 Call Center
Modernization project that will start this year
ii. Survey City Department leadership teams to identify AI use cases in
their department
iii. Survey City department IT managers and facilitate vendor
demonstrations of complex AI tools through citywide I.T. Policy
Committee, such as AI customer service agents, data analysis &
performance management tools, smart city tools, business process
automation, environmental sustainability, etc.
iv. Utilize the existing ITA Data Analytics & Artificial Intelligence bench
contracts for departments seeking to initiate complex artificial
intelligence projects using artificial intelligence as-a-service Cloud
tools and custom-built vendor solutions
3. Build Additional AI Safeguards at the City of L.A. | March - August 2024
a. Publish Citywide Digital Code of Ethics (Emerging Technology Guidelines)
i. Develop and publish a citywide Digital Code of Ethics that articulates
City of Los Angeles’ ethical standards and principles in the use of
technology and data for our residents, providing guidance to all City
departments
ii. Include core values (Human-Centric, Equitable, Transparent, Secure,
and Sustainable) and digital standards applicable to all LA City
departments
iii. Detail guidelines in the use of emerging technologies, across 10
emerging technology areas:
1. Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning,
2. Blockchain,
3. Data Analytics,
4. Digital Assistants,
5. Drones,
6. Facial Recognition,
7. Healthcare Data,
8. Internet of Things,
9. Social Media,
10. Virtual/Augmented Reality
b. Incorporate AI into City’s Existing Acceptable Use Policy (AI Usage)
i. Every employee reviews and signs the City of Los Angeles
Acceptable Use Policy
ii. Artificial intelligence instructions will be added to the existing
Technology Usage Policy to ensure employee awareness and
compliance
c. Develop & Publish an AI Playbook for IT Developers
i. Develop an AI Playbook for IT Developers across the City of Los
Angeles, including:
1. Definitions of Artificial Intelligence
2. AI Technologies and Models
3. AI Frameworks
4. AI Benefits
5. AI Potential Issues
6. AI Use Cases
7. AI Implementation Roadmap
8. Existing AI Contracts & Resources

d. Incorporate AI into Information Security Policy (AI Data Privacy)
i. Every City department reviews and adheres to the City of Los
Angeles Information Security Policy, including data handling and
privacy instructions
ii. Artificial intelligence instructions will be added to the existing
Information Security Policy for department awareness and
compliance

Artificial intelligence offers tremendous opportunities and issues for the City of
Los Angeles. Through the effective and responsible use of artificial intelligence,
City of Los Angeles departments can deliver greater services and benefits to the
residents, businesses, and visitors of Los Angeles. The research,
recommendations, and roadmap found in this report is a responsible and
promising start to the journey of using artificial intelligence.