SEC. 557. STUDY AND REPORT ON PROFESSIONAL MILITARY EDUCATION.

(a) Report.--Not later than December 1, 2025, the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretaries of the military departments, shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on the effectiveness of PME in educating officers of the Armed Forces.

(b) Elements.--The Secretary of Defense shall include in the report the following elements:
	(1) Definitions; purpose statement.--In order to improve readiness and create a culture of lifelong learning for PME students and faculty--
		(A) recommendations regarding whether to define PME, or to revise existing definitions in section 2151 of title 10, United States Code; and
		(B) a purpose statement for PME.
	(2) Course of study.--With regards to a course of study in PME--
		(A) an analysis of, and legislative recommendations regarding, the existing three-phase approach to JPME under section 2154 of title 10, United States Code.
		(B) legislative recommendations regarding developing a statutory three-phase approach for PME other than JPME, similar to such approach for JPME; and
		(C) a proposed career learning plan, provided to an officer every two years, to track the progress of such officer in achieving PME and JPME outcomes and other career milestones.	(3) Curriculum evaluation.--An evaluation of curricula of institutions of PME, including--
		(A) compliance with subject matter requirements under chapter 107 of title 10, United States Code;
		(B) legislative recommendations regarding such subject matter requirements, including whether to include the national defense strategy in such requirements;
		(C) the curriculum development process, including whether such process is responsive to changing global threats, and any ways to improve such process to be able to make rapid, relevant, and responsive curriculum updates;
		(D) current modes of instruction and related recommendations, including the use of interactive seminars, war games, simulations, experiential learning, and iterative case studies;
		(E) special areas of focus regarding innovation, including disruptive change, adaptive thinking, design thinking, cyber security, artificial intelligence, applied design for innovation, and other areas the Secretary determines appropriate; and
		(F) the development and assessment of learning outcomes regarding lethality and strategic influence.	(4) Systems of accountability and performance.--An evaluation of the following accountability and performance systems:
		(A) Student performance assessments.
		(B) The documentation of student performance in military service records.
		(C) Consideration of student performance records in the determination of assignments and promotions.
		(D) Consideration of expertise or academic focus in the determination of assignments.
	(5) Academic faculty and student review system.--A summary of current processes to review the following:
		(A) The means by which faculty assigned to teach PME (including members of the Armed Forces and civilian personnel) are selected, managed, promoted, and evaluated.
		(B) The academic freedom of faculty described in subparagraph (A).
		(C) A review of how members are selected for residential and non-residential PME, including the consideration of student performance assessments during PME.
	(6) Interactions of with institutions of pme civilian institutions.--
		(A) Partnerships.--A review of existing academic partnerships between institutions of PME and civilian institutions, including--
			(i) the scopes, purposes, and lengths of such partnerships;
			(ii) any research, curriculum development, or sharing of faculty or students between institutions; and
			(iii) any collaborations or exchanges by faculties or students.		(B) Consortium.--An appraisal of a prospective consortium of institutions of PME and civilian institutions, including--
			(i) the feasability and advisability of establishing such a consortium;
			(ii) recommendations, if any, regarding potential consortium members;
			(iii) the anticipated costs and timeline to establish such a consortium; and
(iii) whether the inclusion of the Naval Postgraduate School or Air Force Institute of Technology in such a consortium would require legislation.
	(7) Organization.--With regards to the organizational structure and lines of authority established pursuant to section 2152 of title 10, United States Code--
		(A) an analysis; and
		(B) any legislative recommendations.
(c) Interim Briefings and Final Report.--
	(1) Initial briefing.--Not later than June 1, 2023, the Secretary of Defense shall provide to the Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and the Senate an initial briefing on the progress of the Secretary in preparing the report.
	(2) Interim briefings.--Every six months after the initial briefing, the Secretary of Defense shall provide to the Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and the Senate an interim briefing on the progress and contents of the report.
	(3) Final briefing.--Not later than December 1, 2025, in conjunction with issuance of the final report, the Secretary of Defense shall provide to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives a final briefing on the findings and recommendations in the report.
(d) Definitions.--In this section:
	(1) The term ``institutions of PME'' means--
		(A) the professional military education schools;
		(B) the senior level service schools;
		(C) the intermediate level service schools;
		(D) the joint intermediate level service school;
		(E) the Naval Postgraduate School; and
		(F) the Air Force Institute of Technology.
	(2) The terms intermediate level service school'', joint intermediate level service school'', and ``senior level service school'' have the meaning given such terms in section 2151 of title 10, United States Code.
	(3) The term JPME'' means joint professional military education'' has the meaning given such term in section 2151 of title 10, United States Code.
	(4) The term ``PME'' means professional military education, including JPME.
	(5) The term ``professional military education schools'' means the schools specified in section 2162(b) of title 10, United States Code.