Bill of Law No. 5051 of 2019. 

BILL NO. , DE 2019

Establishes the principles for Artificial Intelligence usage in Brazil.

THE NATIONAL CONGRESS decrees: 

Art. 1 This law establishes the principles for Artificial Intelligence usage in Brazil. 

Art. 2 The subject of the Artificial Intelligence usage in Brazil is based on the recognition that it is a technology developed to serve people in order to improve human well-being in general, as well as: 

I – respect human dignity, freedom, democracy, and equality; 

II – respect for human rights, plurality, and diversity; 

III – the guarantee of protection of privacy and personal data; 

IV – transparency, reliability, and the auditability of the systems; 

V – human supervision. 

Art. 3 The subject of Artificial Intelligence usage in Brazil aims to promote and harmonize the value of human work and economic development. 

Art. 4 Decision-making systems based on Artificial Intelligence will always be auxiliary to human decision-making.

Paragraph 1. The type of human supervision required will be compatible with the type, severity, and implications of the decision submitted to the Artificial Intelligence systems.

Paragraph 2. The civil liability for damages resulting from the usage of Artificial Intelligence systems will be attributed to its supervisor. 

Art. 5 It is part of the guidelines for the performance of the Union, the States, the Federal District, and the Municipalities in the Artificial Intelligence development in Brazil: 

I – the promotion of education for mental, emotional, and economic development in harmony with Artificial Intelligence;

II – the creation of specific policies for the workers' protection and training;

III – assurance of the gradual adoption of Artificial Intelligence;

IV – proactive action in regulating Artificial Intelligence applications;

Art. 6 The Artificial Intelligence applications by Government entities will seek the quality and efficiency of the services offered to the population.

Art. 7 This Law enters into force after 45 (forty and five) days of its official publication. 

JUSTIFICATION

The adoption of systems based on Artificial Intelligence in the industry and the provision of services is a reality worldwide nowadays. This new technology, without question, could bring tremendous gains in productivity and improvements in quality. 

However, despite the advantages Artificial Intelligence can bring, its adoption also has associated risks. For that reason, one cannot recklessly adopt Artificial Intelligence without minimum regulation to provide the necessary guarantees for this transition. 

For that reason, this proposal is being introduced to establish the basic principles of Artificial Intelligence usage. 

As can be noticed, it is not about stopping the advance of technology, but to ensure that this development occurs in harmony with the recognition of the value of human work, to promote the well-being of all. 

In terms of the proposal, it is worth mentioning that every Artificial Intelligence system will have the supervision of a human person in a way that is compatible with each application. In this way, it is possible to couple the advantages brought by this technological innovation with the required security, avoiding unwanted consequences caused by eventual mistakes of the automated system. 

In addition, to clarify any questions about liability for damages resulting from artificial intelligence systems, the project defines that the liability will always lie with the system’s human supervisor. 

The proposal also establishes specific guidelines for the State’s performance, among which it is worth mentioning the creation of specific policies for workers’ protection and training. In this way, the intention is to mitigate any adverse effects of this new technology. 

By the above, the noble colleagues' collaboration is counted on to improve this proposal and achieve its approval. 

Meeting Room, Senator STYVENSON VALENTIM
