SEC. 1535. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FUTURES STEERING COMMITTEE.
    (a) Establishment.--
        (1) In general.--Not later than April 1, 2026, the Secretary of 
    Defense shall establish a steering committee on advanced artificial 
    intelligence capabilities.
        (2) Designation.--The steering committee established pursuant 
    to paragraph (1) shall be known as the ``Artificial Intelligence 
    Futures Steering Committee'' (in this section the ``Steering 
    Committee'').
    (b) Membership.--The Steering Committee shall be composed of the 
following:
        (1) The Deputy Secretary of Defense.
        (2) The Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
        (3) The Vice Chief of Staff of the Army.
        (4) The Vice Chief of Staff of Naval Operations.
        (5) The Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps.
        (6) The Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force.
        (7) The Vice Chief of Space Operations.
        (8) The Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau.
        (9) The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and 
    Sustainment.
        (10) The Under Secretary of Defense for Research and 
    Engineering.
        (11) The Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and 
    Security.
        (12) The Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief 
    Financial Officer.
        (13) Such representatives from the military departments as the 
    Secretary considers appropriate.
        (14) The Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer of 
    the Department of Defense.
        (15) Representatives of such innovation centers within the 
    defense innovation ecosystem as the Secretary of Defense determines 
    appropriate.
        (16) Representatives of such other organizations and elements 
    of the Department of Defense as the Secretary determines 
    appropriate.
    (c) Co-chairpersons.--The Deputy Secretary of Defense and the Vice 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall serve as the co-chairs of 
the Steering Committee.
    (d) Responsibilities.--The Steering Committee shall be responsible 
for--
        (1) formulating a proactive policy for the evaluation, 
    adoption, governance, and risk mitigation of advanced artificial 
    intelligence systems by the Department of Defense that are more 
    advanced than any existing advanced artificial intelligence 
    systems, including advanced artificial intelligence systems that 
    approach or achieve artificial general intelligence;
        (2) analyzing the forecasted trajectory of advanced and 
    emerging artificial intelligence models and enabling technologies 
    across multiple time horizons that could enable artificial general 
    intelligence, including--
            (A) current and emerging artificial intelligence models, 
        including frontier and world models;
            (B) agentic algorithms;
            (C) neuromorphic computing;
            (D) cognitive science applications for the development of 
        artificial intelligence algorithms or models;
            (E) infrastructure needs for infrastructure required to 
        support the deployment of new or emerging artificial 
        intelligence systems at a scale projected necessary for future 
        capacity;
            (F) new or emerging microelectronics designs or 
        architectures; and
            (G) such other technologies as the Steering Committee 
        determines appropriate;
        (3) assess the possible technological, operational, and 
    doctrinal trajectories of adversaries of the United States with 
    respect to the uses of artificial intelligence capabilities by such 
    adversaries across various time horizons, including any pursuit or 
    development by such adversaries of artificial general intelligence;
        (4) analyzing the potential operational effects of integrating 
    advanced or general purpose artificial intelligence into networks 
    and systems of the Department of Defense from a technical, 
    doctrinal, training, and resourcing perspective to better 
    understand and assess how use of such networks and systems by the 
    Department of Defense may affect future commanders of operational 
    commands;
        (5) developing a strategy for the risk-informed adoption, 
    governance, and oversight of advanced or general purpose artificial 
    intelligence by the Department, including--
            (A) articulation of ethical, policy, and technical 
        guardrails to maintain, to the extent practical, appropriate 
        human decision making in and prevent the misuse of such 
        advanced or general purpose artificial intelligence;
            (B) an assessment of potential effects on commanders of 
        operational commands, including effects related to maintaining 
        oversight of mission command when using artificial intelligence 
        and the capability for humans to override artificial 
        intelligence through technical, policy, or other operational 
        controls;
            (C) broad resource requirements for artificial 
        intelligence, including funding, personnel, and infrastructure; 
        and
            (D) measurable goals to support Department-level decision 
        making on resourcing, programming and budgeting; and
        (6) analyzing the threat landscape associated with the use of 
    advanced artificial intelligence, including artificial general 
    intelligence, by adversaries of the United States and developing 
    options and counter-artificial intelligence strategies to defend 
    against such use.
    (e) Meeting Frequency.--The Steering Committee shall meet not less 
frequently than once every three months.
    (f) Report.--
        (1) In general.--Not later than January 31, 2027, the Deputy 
    Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
    committees a report on the findings of the Steering Committee with 
    respect to the matters described in subsection (d).
        (2) Form of report.--The report submitted pursuant to paragraph 
    (1) shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may include a 
    classified annex.
        (3) Public availability.--The Deputy Secretary of Defense shall 
    make available to the public the unclassified portion of the report 
    submitted pursuant to paragraph (1).
    (g) Sunset.--The requirements and authorities of this section shall 
terminate on December 31, 2027.
    (h) Definitions.--In this section:
        (1) The term ``artificial intelligence'' has the meaning given 
    such term in 238(g) of the John S. McCain National Defense 
    Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 
    U.S.C. note prec. 4061).
        (2) The term ``innovation ecosystem'' means a regionally based 
    network of private sector, academic, and government institutions in 
    a network of formal and informal institutional relationships that 
    contribute to technological and economic development in a defined 
    technology sector or sectors.
