    SEC. 914. SMALL-UAS INDUSTRIAL BASE WORKING GROUP.
    (a) Establishment.--Not later than January 15, 2026, the Deputy 
Secretary of Defense shall establish a working group to be known as the 
``Small-UAS Industrial Base Working Group'' (referred to in this 
section as the ``Working Group'') to analyze the supplier base for 
small-UAS systems and recommend investments or other actions to improve 
such supplier base.
    (b) Members.--The Working Group shall be composed of the following 
members:
        (1) The Deputy Secretary of Defense.
        (2) The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Industrial Base 
    Policy.
        (3) The Director of the Defense Autonomous Warfare Group.
        (4) One or more representatives of the Defense Innovation Unit.
        (5) The service acquisition executive of each military 
    department.
        (6) One or more representatives from the Army Materiel Command.
        (7) One or more representatives from the United States Special 
    Operations Command.
        (8) Such other members as the Deputy Secretary of Defense 
    determines appropriate.
    (c) Director of Working Group.--The Director of the Defense 
Autonomous Warfare Group shall serve as the Director of the Working 
Group.
    (d) Responsibilities.--The Working Group shall have the following 
responsibilities:
        (1) Analyzing the current capacity of the sUAS industrial base, 
    including manufacturers of complete sUAS systems and suppliers of 
    components for such systems.
        (2) Identifying likely investments by entities in the sUAS 
    industrial base to remediate fragile supply chains and supply 
    chains for systems or components for which there are limited or no 
    domestic suppliers, taking into account reasonable estimates of 
    Federal Government and commercial demand and ensuring that private 
    investment is leveraged to the greatest extent practicable.
        (3) Developing plans for investments and other actions to 
    remediate fragile or non-U.S. suppliers, including the following:
            (A) Continued Federal Government purchases of significant 
        numbers of sUAS systems.
            (B) Partnerships between entities in the sUAS industrial 
        base and the Federal Government, including--
                (i) the SkyFoundry initiative of the Army Materiel 
            Command;
                (ii) arrangements for companies in the sUAS industrial 
            base to operate commercially-owned, commercially-operated 
            production facilities on sites within the United States 
            organic industrial base;
                (iii) arrangements for the establishment of Government-
            owned, contractor-operated sUAS component production 
            facilities on such sites; and
                (iv) arrangements for the establishment of Government-
            owned, Government-operated sUAS component production 
            facilities on such sites.
            (C) Identifying sUAS capabilities that are required by the 
        Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, and Space Force, but which 
        commercial industry cannot or is not expected to fulfill.
            (D) Identifying opportunities for public-private 
        partnerships to support the incubation and innovation of sUAS 
        technology.
        (4) Identifying potential changes in qualification processes 
    for sUAS components that could enable greater commercial production 
    of such components and sUAS systems.
    (e) Reports.--
        (1) Initial report.--Not later than April 1, 2026, the Working 
    Group shall submit to the Deputy Secretary of Defense and the 
    congressional defense committees a report that includes--
            (A) an initial assessment of the sUAS industrial base;
            (B) a summary of the aggregate demand signal made by the 
        Federal Government for sUAS production as of the date of the 
        report;
            (C) a summary of the future projected demand signal by the 
        Federal Government for sUAS production;
            (D) a description of the likely investments in the sUAS 
        component supplier base by commercial industry over the period 
        of 18 months following the date of the report;
            (E) recommendations for investments or other actions to 
        strengthen the sUAS industrial base to optimally meet aggregate 
        Federal Government and commercial demand; and
            (F) an assessment of the Sky Foundry initiative of the Army 
        to determine how that initiative is expected to--
                (i) assist the Army in meeting its sUAS requirements at 
            a competitive cost; and
                (ii) materially impact the health of the sUAS 
            industrial base.
        (2) Biannual reports.--Not less frequently than once every 180 
    days following the submittal of the initial report under paragraph 
    (1), the Working Group shall submit to the Deputy Secretary of 
    Defense and the congressional defense committees an updated version 
    of the report.
    (f) Authorization of SkyFoundry Program.--The Secretary of the Army 
may establish a SkyFoundry program if--
        (1) the Working Group has submitted the initial report required 
    under subsection (e)(1) to the congressional defense committees; 
    and
        (2) the Deputy Secretary of Defense certifies to such 
    committees that the SkyFoundry program--
            (A) will improve the ability of the Army to rapidly field 
        sUAS systems at a competitive cost; and
            (B) will not negatively impact the commercial sUAS 
        industrial base.
    (g) Definitions.--In this section:
        (1) The term ``small-UAS'' or ``sUAS'' means an unmanned 
    aircraft system designated as Group 1, Group 2, or Group 3 in the 
    Unmanned Aircraft Systems Categorization Chart set forth in chapter 
    III of the Department of Defense Joint Publication 3-30 (relating 
    to ``Joint Air Operations''), or any successor to such 
    categorization system.
        (2) The term ``sUAS component'' means any of following 
    components for sUAS systems:
            (A) Brushless motors.
            (B) Batteries.
            (C) Antennae.
            (D) Flight controllers, including printed circuit boards.
            (E) Wiring harnesses.
            (F) Rotors.
            (G) Blades and propellers.
            (H) Chassis, bodies, and frames.
            (I) Sensors, including electro-optical and infra-red 
        sensors, GPS, and other such sensors.