BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF TENNESSEE:
SECTION 1. This act is known and may be cited as the "Tennessee Artificial Intelligence
Advisory Council Act."
SECTION 2.
The purpose of the council is to recommend an action plan to guide awareness,
education, and usage of artificial intelligence in state government that aligns with the
state's policies and goals and that supports public employees in the efficient and
effective delivery of customer service. The council shall include definitive actions,
policies, and investments needed to leverage artificial intelligence as part of the plan.
SECTION 3.
As used in this act:
(1) "Advisory council" means the Tennessee artificial intelligence advisory
council; and
(2) "Artificial intelligence" means models and systems capable of
performing functions generally associated with human intelligence, including
reasoning and learning.
SECTION 4.
(a) There is created the Tennessee artificial intelligence advisory council.
(b) The advisory council must be composed of twenty-four (24) members, as
follows:
(1) The commissioner of finance and administration, or the
commissioner's designee;
(2) The commissioner of the department of human resources, or the
commissioner's designee;
(3) The commissioner of economic and community development, or the
commissioner's designee;
(4) The commissioner of labor and workforce development, or the
commissioner's designee;
(5) The commissioner of education, or the commissioner's designee;
(6) The commissioner of commerce and insurance, or the commissioner's
designee;
(7) The commissioner of safety, or the commissioner's designee; 
HB2325
(8) The state's chief information officer, or the chief information officer's
designee;
(9) The state's chief operating officer, or the chief operating officer's
designee;
(1 0) The attorney general and reporter, or the attorney general and
reporter's designee;
(11) The director of the office of legislative information systems, or the
director's designee;
(12) The chair of the finance, ways and means committee of the senate
and the chair of the finance, ways, and means committee of the house of
representatives, or their designees;
(13) The chair of the commerce and labor committee of the senate and
the chair of the commerce committee of the house of representatives, or their
designees;
(14) Seven (7) members appointed by the governor. Such members may
have an interest or be experienced in:
(A) Local government;
(B) Higher education;
(C) Workforce development;
(D) A business in this state that is likely to be impacted by artificial
intelligence;
(E) An artificial intelligence developer or expert;
(F) A representative of academics with a concentration in
technology policy; or
(G) A representative of the Tennessee bureau of investigation;
( 15) One ( 1) member appointed by the speaker of the senate; and
(16) One (1) member appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives.
(c)
(1) The chief information officer for the state and the commissioner of
finance and administration shall serve as joint chairs of the advisory council.
(2) In the event of a vacancy on the advisory council, the joint chairs shall
notify the respective appointing authority, who shall then appoint a person to fill
the vacancy.
(3) The joint chairs shall call all meetings and the advisory council shall
meet at least four (4) times per calendar year. The joint chairs may establish
subcommittees of the advisory council's members as necessary to ensure the
council's effective and efficient operation.
(4) The advisory council is attached to the department of finance and
administration for administrative purposes.
SECTION 5.
(a) The advisory council shall submit an action plan to the governor addressing
how to:
(1) Position this state competitively to ensure its citizens capture the full
economic benefit from artificial intelligence opportunities; and
(2) Responsibly leverage artificial intelligence to improve the efficiency of
state and local government services.
(b) No later than May 1, 2025, the joint chairs shall submit a status report on the
council's activities and progress as of such date.
(c) No later than December 31, 2025 and by December 31 of 2026 and 2027
thereafter, the joint chairs shall submit to the governor, the speaker of the senate, and
the speaker of the house of representatives a report containing, at a minimum, the
following findings for the respective years as of such dates:
(1) The current state of artificial intelligence and its likely impact on this
state's labor market conditions;
(2) How the labor market impact might reshape this state's key industries,
occupations, and foundational skillsets;
(3) Initiatives to stimulate economic growth, create jobs, and enhance
talent development in the face of artificial intelligence-related changes;
(4) Recommended legal regulations or policy changes needed to ensure
the responsible and ethical use of artificial intelligence in this state, while
protecting the rights of Tennessee citizens;
(5) Ways to encourage artificial intelligence innovation and
entrepreneurship and strategies to support workers displaced by artificial
intelligence;
(6) Proposed policy changes related to workforce development,
educational systems, and research opportunities for colleges and universities in
this state;
(7) An overview of the goals, benefits, potential uses, and limitations of
artificial intelligence systems; and
(8) Recommended ways to promote transparency and accountability for
the use of artificial intelligence technologies by measuring, monitoring and
reporting outcomes and progress.
(d) No later than December 31, 2028, the joint chairs shall deliver to the
governor, the speaker of the senate, and the speaker of the house of representatives a
final report and action plan containing, at a minimum, the following findings:
(1) Principles and values to guide artificial intelligence use in state and
local governments;
(2) Governance framework with policies, procedures, and processes for
the development, deployment, and use of artificial intelligence by state and local
governments;
(3) Evaluation of potentially beneficial use cases for deployment of
artificial intelligence tools and strategies by the state to improve government
services;
(4) Risk analysis of potential threats to this state's key infrastructure from
artificial intelligence technologies;
(5) Recommendations on how this state can support state and local
government employees through the artificial intelligence transition;
(6) Recommendations on how to position this state competitively to
ensure its citizens capture the full economic benefit from artificial intelligence
opportunities; and
(7) Recommendations on how to responsibly leverage artificial
intelligence to improve the efficiency of state and local government services.
SECTION 6.
(a) Members of the advisory council receive no compensation for their service
but must be reimbursed for official travel expenses in accordance with the
comprehensive travel regulations as promulgated by the department of finance and
administration.
(b) All state departments and agencies shall cooperate with the advisory council
in carrying out its duties and shall provide support or other assistance as reasonably
requested. The advisory council may consult with other persons and organizations with
expertise related to artificial intelligence, government infrastructure, and economic
development.
SECTION 7. This act is repealed on December 31, 2028.
SECTION 8. This act takes effect upon becoming a law, the public welfare requiring it. 