SEC. 9412. INDUSTRIES OF THE FUTURE.

(a) SHORT TITLE.—This section may be cited as the ‘‘Industries of the Future Act of 2020’’.

(b) REPORT ON FEDERAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FOCUSED ON INDUSTRIES OF THE FUTURE.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy shall submit to Congress a report on research and development investments, infrastructure, and workforce development investments of the Federal Government that enable continued United States leadership in industries of the future.
(2) CONTENTS.—The report submitted under paragraph (1) shall include the following:
(A) A definition, for purposes of this section, of the term ‘‘industries of the future’’ that includes emerging technologies.
(B) An assessment of the current baseline of investments in civilian research and development investments of the Federal Government in the industries of the future.
(C) A plan to double such baseline investments in artificial intelligence and quantum information science by fiscal year 2022.
(D) A detailed plan to increase investments described in subparagraph (B) in industries of the future to $10,000,000,000 per year by fiscal year 2025.
(E) A plan to leverage investments described in subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D) in industries of the future to elicit complimentary investments by non-Federal entities, including providing incentives for significant complementary investments by such entities and facilitating public-private partnerships.
(F) Proposals for the Federal Government, including any necessary draft legislation, to implement such plans.

(c) INDUSTRIES OF THE FUTURE COORDINATION COUNCIL.—
(1) ESTABLISHMENT.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—The President shall establish or designate a council to advise the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy on matters relevant to the Director and the industries of the future.
(B) DESIGNATION.—The council established or designated under subparagraph (A) shall be known as the ‘‘Industries of the Future Coordination Council’’ (in this section the ‘‘Council’’).
(2) MEMBERSHIP.—
(A) COMPOSITION.—The Council shall be composed of employees of the Federal Government who shall be appointed as follows:
(i) One member appointed by the Director.
(ii) A chairperson of the Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence of the National Science and Technology Council.
(iii) A chairperson of the Subcommittee on Advanced Manufacturing of the National Science and Technology Council.
(iv) A chairperson of the Subcommittee on Quantum Information Science of the National Science and Technology Council.
(v) Such other members as the President considers appropriate.
(B) CHAIRPERSON.—The member appointed to the Council under paragraph (A)(i) shall serve as the chairperson of the Council.
(3) DUTIES.—The duties of the Council are as follows:
(A) To provide the Director with advice on ways in which in the Federal Government can ensure the United States continues to lead the world in developing emerging technologies that improve the quality of life of the people of the United States, increase economic competitiveness of the United States, and strengthen the national security of the United States, including identification of the following:
(i) Federal investments required in fundamental research and development, infrastructure, technology transfer, and workforce development of the United States workers who will support the industries of the future.
(ii) Actions necessary to create and further develop the workforce that will support the industries of the future.
(iii) Actions required to leverage the strength of the research and development ecosystem of the United States, which includes academia, industry, and nonprofit organizations, to support industries of the future.
(iv) Ways that the Federal Government can consider leveraging existing partnerships and creating new partnerships and other multisector collaborations to advance the industries of the future.
(v) Actions required to accelerate the translation of federally funded research and development to practice and meaningful benefits for society while mitigating any risks.
(B) To provide the Director with advice on matters relevant to the report required under subsection (b).
(4) COORDINATION.—The Council shall coordinate with and utilize relevant existing National Science and Technology Council committees to the maximum extent feasible in order to minimize duplication of effort. (5) APPLICABILITY OF FACA.—The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply to the Council established under this subsection.
(6) SUNSET.—The Council shall terminate on the date that is 6 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.