SEC. 916. STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT DASHBOARD DEMONSTRATION.

(a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall conduct a demonstration of a strategic management dashboard to automate the data collection and data visualization of the primary management goals of the Department of Defense.

(b) Elements.--The Secretary of Defense shall ensure that the strategic management dashboard demonstrated under subsection (a) includes the following:
	(1) The capability for real-time monitoring of the performance of the Department of Defense in meeting the management goals of the Department.
	(2) An integrated analytics capability, including the ability to dynamically add or upgrade new capabilities when needed.
	(3) Integration with the framework required by subsection (c) of section 125a of title 10, United States Code, for measuring the progress of the Department toward covered elements of reform (as defined in subsection (d) of that section).
	(4) Incorporation of the elements of the strategic management plan required by section 904(d) of the National Defense Authorization Act of Fiscal Year 2008 (Public Law 110-
181; 10 U.S.C. note prec. 2201), as derived from automated data feeds from existing information systems and databases.
	(5) Incorporation of the elements of the most recent annual performance plan of the Department required by section 1115(b) of title 31, United States Code, and the most recent update on performance of the Department required by section 1116 of that title.
	(6) Use of artificial intelligence and machine learning tools to improve decision making and assessment relating to data analytics.
	(7) Adoption of leading and lagging indicators for key strategic management goals.
(c) Authorities.--
	(1) In general.--In conducting the demonstration required by subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense may use the authorities described in paragraph (2), and such other authorities as the Secretary considers appropriate--
		(A) to help accelerate the development of innovative technological or process approaches; and
		(B) to attract new entrants to solve the data management and visualization challenges of the Department.
	(2) Authorities described.--The authorities described in this paragraph are the authorities provided under the following provisions of law:
		(A) Section 4025 of title 10, United States Code (relating to prizes for advanced technology achievements).
		(B) Section 217 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (Public Law 114-
92; 10 U.S.C. 2222 note) (relating to science and technology activities to support business systems information technology acquisition programs).
		(C) Section 908 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-
81; 10 U.S.C. 129a note) (relating to management innovation activities).
(d) Use of Best Practices.--In conducting the demonstration required by subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense shall leverage commercial best practices in management and leading research in management and data science.

(e) Strategic Management Dashboard Defined.--In this section, the term ``strategic management dashboard'' means a system for dynamically displaying management metrics, performance goals, and other information necessary for Department of Defense leadership to make strategic decisions related to the management of the Department using modern, commercial practices for data visualization and drawn from existing automated information systems available to the Department.