SEC. 1092. NATIONAL COMMISSION ON THE FUTURE OF THE NAVY.

(a) Establishment.--
	(1) In general.--There is established an independent commission in the legislative branch to be known as the Commission on the Future of the Navy'' (in this section referred to as the Commission'').
	(2) Duties of commission.--
		(A) Study on naval force structure.--
			(i) In general.--The Commission shall undertake a comprehensive study of the structure of the Navy and policy assumptions related to the size and force mixture of the Navy, in order--
		(I) to make recommendations on the size and force mixture of ships; and
		(II) to make recommendations on the size and force mixture of naval aviation.(ii) Considerations.--In undertaking the study required by this subsection, the Commission shall carry out each of the following:
		(I) An evaluation and identification of a structure for the Navy that--
(aa) has the depth and scalability to meet current and anticipated requirements of the combatant commands;
(bb) assumes four different funding levels of: fiscal year 2023 appropriated plus inflation; fiscal year 2023 appropriated with 3-5 percent real growth; such as is necessary to build, man, maintain and modernize the fleet required by section 1025 of the National Defense Authorization Act for 2018 (Public Law 115-
91); and notionally unconstrained to meet the needs of the National Defense Strategy including a particular focus on the areas of responsibility of United States Indo-Pacific Command and United States European Command;
(cc) ensures that the Navy has the capacity needed to support current and anticipated homeland defense and disaster assistance missions in the United States;
(dd) provides for sufficient numbers of members of the Navy to ensure a 115 percent manning level of all deployed ships and not
less than a 90 percent manning level at any point in time;
(ee) provides a sustainable force generation model with the associated rotational presence, personnel, training, and maintenance assumptions;
(ff) identifies forward basing and stationing requirements; and
(gg) identifies potential strategic and operational risk tradeoffs and makes recommendations among readiness, efficiency, effectiveness, capability, and affordability.		(II) An evaluation and identification of combatant command demand and fleet size, including recommendations to support--
(aa) readiness;
(bb) training;
(cc) routine ship maintenance;
(dd) personnel;
(ee) forward presence;
(ff) depot level ship maintenance; and
(gg) fleet modernization.
		(III) A detailed review of the cost of the recapitalization of the Nuclear Triad in the Department of Defense and its effect on the Navy's budget.
		(IV) A review of Navy personnel policies and training to determine changes needed across all personnel activities to improve training effectiveness and force tactical readiness and reduce operational stress.		(B) Study on shipbuilding and innovation.--
			(i) In general.--The Commission shall conduct a study on shipbuilding, new construction, and repair shipyards, and opportunities to better integrate advanced technologies such as augmented reality and artificial intelligence in the fleet.
			(ii) Considerations.--In conducting the study required under this subsection, the Commission shall consider the following:
		(I) Recommendations for specific changes to the Navy's Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Program, which may include legislative changes such as providing multi-year appropriations or expanded use of innovative technology.
		(II) Recommendations for changes to the ship design and build program that could reduce technical and schedule risk, reduce cost, accelerate build timelines, and prioritize an incremental approach to introducing change.
		(III) Recommendations for changes to the ship depot maintenance program in order to reduce overhaul timelines, integrate current technologies into ships, and reduce costs.	(3) Powers of commission.--
		(A) Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such
testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out its duties under this section.
		(B) Information from federal agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out its duties under this section. Upon request of the Co-Chairs of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
		(C) Use of postal service.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
		(D) Authority to accept gifts.--
			(i) In general.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services, goods, and property from non-Federal entities for the purposes of aiding and facilitating the work of the Commission. The authority under this paragraph does not extend to gifts of money.
			(ii) Documentation; conflicts of interest.--
The Commission shall document gifts accepted under the authority provided by clause (i) and shall avoid conflicts of interest or the appearance of conflicts of interest.
(iii) Compliance with congressional ethics rules.--Except as specifically provided in this section, a member of the Commission shall comply with rules set forth by the Select Committee on Ethics of the Senate and the Committee on Ethics of the House of Representatives governing employees of the Senate and the House of Representatives, respectively.	(4) Report required.--Not later than July 1, 2024, the Commission shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives an unclassified report, with classified annexes if necessary, that includes the findings and conclusions of the Commission as a result of the studies required under this section, together with its recommendations for such legislative actions as the Commission considers appropriate in light of the results of the studies.
(b) Membership.--
	(1) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 8 members, of whom--
		(A) one shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives;
		(B) one shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives;
		(C) one shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate;
		(D) one shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate;
		(E) one shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate;
		(F) one shall be appointed by the Ranking Member of the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate;
		(G) one shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives; and
		(H) one shall be appointed by the Ranking Member of the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives.
	(2) Co-chairs.--There shall be two Co-Chairs of the Commission. The Republican leadership of the Senate and House of Representatives shall jointly select one Co-Chair, and the Democratic leadership of the Senate and House of Representatives shall jointly select the other.
	(3) Appointment date; notifications.--
		(A) Members shall be appointed to the commission under paragraph (1) by not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
		(B) Individuals making appointments under paragraph (1) shall provide notice of the appointments to the Secretary of Defense (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'').	(4) Qualifications and expertise.--
		(A) In general.--In making appointments under this subsection, consideration shall be given to individuals with expertise in--
			(i) United States naval policy and strategy;
			(ii) naval forces capability;
			(iii) naval nuclear propulsion and weapons;
			(iv) naval force structure design, organization, and employment;
			(v) Navy personnel matters;
			(vi) Navy acquisition and sustainment;
			(vii) Navy shipbuilding;
			(viii) naval aviation aircraft procurement; and
			(ix) Navy ship and aircraft depot maintenance.
		(B) Restriction on appointment.--Officers or employees of the Federal Government (other than experts or consultants the services of which are procured under section 3109 of title 5, United States Code) may not be appointed as members of the Commission.
		(C) Restriction on members of congress.--Members of Congress may not serve on the Commission.
	(5) Period of appointment; vacancies; removal of members.--
		(A) Appointment duration.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
		(B) Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
		(C) Removal of members.--A member may be removed from the Commission for cause by the individual serving in the position responsible for the original appointment of such member under subsection (b)(1), provided that notice has first been provided to such member of the cause for removal and voted and agreed upon by three quarters of the members serving. A vacancy created by the removal of a member under this subsection shall not affect the powers of the Commission, and shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made.
		(D) Quorum.--.A majority of the members serving on the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
		(E) Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed as published in the Congressional Record, the Commission shall hold its initial meeting.
(c) Personnel Matters.--
	(1) Status as federal employees.--Notwithstanding the requirements of section 2105 of title 5, United States Code, including the required supervision under subsection (a)(3) of such section, members of the Commission shall be deemed to be Federal employees in the legislative branch subject to all the laws and policies applicable to legislative branch employees.
	(2) Oath of office.--Notwithstanding the provision of section 2903(b) of title 5, United States Code, an employee of an Executive Branch agency, otherwise authorized to administer oaths under section 2903 of title 5, United States Code, may administer the oath of office to Commissioners for the purpose of their service to the Commission.
	(3) Security clearances.--The appropriate Federal departments or agencies shall cooperate with the Commission in expeditiously providing to the Commission members and staff appropriate security clearances to the extent possible pursuant to existing procedures and requirements, except that no person may be provided with access to classified information under this Act without the appropriate security clearances.
	(4) Pay for members.--Each member of the Commission may be compensated at a rate not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission. All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation additional to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.	(5) Staff.--
		(A) Executive director.--The Co-Chairs of the Commission may appoint and fix the rate of basic pay for an Executive Director in accordance with section 3161 of title 5, United States Code.
		(B) Commission staff.--The Executive Director may appoint and fix the rate of basic pay for additional personnel as staff of the Commission in accordance with section 3161 of title 5, United States Code.
		(C) Detailees authorized.--On a reimbursable or non-reimbursable basis, the heads of departments and agencies of the Federal Government may provide, and the Commission may accept personnel detailed from such departments and agencies, including active-duty military personnel.
		(D) Travel expenses.--The members and staff of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes
or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
(d) Support.--
	(1) Assistance from department of defense.--
		(A) In general.--Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Defense for support of the Commission, the Secretary may make transfers to the Commission for commission expenses, including compensation of commission members, officers, and employees, and provision of other such services, funds, facilities, and other support services as necessary for the performance of the Commission's functions. Funds made available to support and provide assistance to the Commission may be used for payment of compensation of members, officers, and employees of the Commission without transfer under this subparagraph. Amounts transferred under this subparagraph shall remain available until expended. Transfer authority provided by this subparagraph is in addition to any other transfer authority provided by law. Section 2215 of title 10, United States Code, shall not apply to a transfer of funds under this subparagraph.
		(B) Treasury account authorized.--The Secretary of the Treasury may establish an account or accounts for the Commission from which any amounts transferred under this clause may be used for activities of the Commission.
	(2) Liaison.--The Secretary shall designate at least one officer or employee of the Department of Defense to serve as a liaison officer between the Department and the Commission.
	(3) Additional support.--To the extent that funds are available for such purpose, or on a reimbursable basis, the Secretary may, at the request of the Co-
Chairs of the Commission--
		(A) enter into contracts for the acquisition of administrative supplies and equipment for use by the Commission; and
		(B) make available the services of a Federal funded research and development center or an independent, nongovernmental organization, described under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of such Code.
	(4) Preliminary administrative support authorized.--Upon the appointment of the Co-Chairs under subsection (b), the Secretary may provide administrative support authorized under this section necessary to facilitate the standing up of the Commission.

(e) Termination of Commission.--The Commission shall terminate 90 days after the submission of the report required under subsection (a).