SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Artificial Intelligence Training for 
the Acquisition Workforce Act'' or the ``AI Training Act''.

SEC. 2. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TRAINING PROGRAMS.

    (a) Definitions.--In this section:
            (1) AI.--The term ``AI'' has the meaning given the term 
        ``artificial intelligence'' in section 238(g) of the John S. 
        McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 
        (10 U.S.C. 2358 note).
            (2) AI training program.--The term ``AI training program'' 
        means the training program established under subsection (b)(1).           
 (3) Covered workforce.--The term ``covered workforce''         means--
                    (A) employees of an executive agency who are 
                responsible for--
                          (i) program management;
                          (ii) the planning, research, development, 
                      engineering, testing, and evaluation of systems, 
                      including quality control and assurance;
                          (iii) procurement and contracting;
                          (iv) logistics; or
                          (v) cost estimating; and
                    (B) other personnel of an executive agency 
                designated by the head of the executive agency to 
                participate in the AI training program.
            (4) Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of 
        the Office of Management and Budget.
            (5) Executive agency.--The term ``executive agency''--
                    (A) has the meaning given the term in section 133 of 
                title 41, United States Code; and
                    (B) does not include--
                          (i) the Department of Defense or a component 
                      of the Department of Defense; or
                          (ii) the National Nuclear Security 
                      Administration or a component of the National 
                      Nuclear Security Administration.
   
 (b) Requirement.--            (1)  In general.--Not 
        later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, and 
        not less frequently than annually thereafter, the Director, in 
        coordination with the Administrator of General Services and any 
        other person determined relevant by the Director, shall develop 
        and implement or otherwise provide an AI training program for 
        the covered workforce.
            (2) Purpose.--The purpose of the AI training program shall 
        be to ensure that the covered workforce has knowledge of the 
        capabilities and risks associated with AI.         
   (3) Topics.--The AI training program shall include         information relating to--
                    (A) the science underlying AI, including how AI 
                works;
                    (B) introductory concepts relating to the 
                technological features of artificial intelligence 
                systems;
                    (C) the ways in which AI can benefit the Federal 
                Government;
                    (D) the risks posed by AI, including discrimination 
                and risks to privacy;
                    (E) ways to mitigate the risks described in 
                subparagraph (D), including efforts to create and 
                identify AI that is reliable, safe, and trustworthy; and
                    (F) future trends in AI, including trends for 
                homeland and national security and innovation.
            (4) Updates.--Not less frequently 
        than once every 2 years, the Director shall update the AI 
        training program to--
                    (A) incorporate new information relating to AI; and
                    (B) ensure that the AI training program continues to 
                satisfy the requirements under paragraph (3).      
      (5) Format.--The Director is encouraged to develop and         implement or otherwise include under the AI training program 
        interactive learning with--
                    (A) technologists;
                    (B) scholars; and
                    (C) other experts from the private, public, and 
                nonprofit sectors.
            (6) Metrics.--The Director shall ensure the existence of a 
        means by which to--
                    (A) understand and measure the participation of the 
                covered workforce; and
                    (B) receive and consider feedback from participants 
                in the AI training program to improve the AI training 
                program.
            (7) Sunset.--Effective 10 years after the date of enactment 
        of this Act, this section shall have no force or effect.