SEC. 1086. FRAMEWORK FOR REFORMING TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER AND FOREIGN 
DISCLOSURE POLICIES.
    (a) Framework Development.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall produce a 
framework to revise technology transfer and foreign disclosure policies 
and processes of the military departments and the technology transfer 
and foreign disclosure committees.
    (b) Framework Elements.--The framework produced pursuant to 
subsection (a) shall include the following:
        (1) Guidelines for balancing the protection of technology and 
    classified information with the requirement to share technology and 
    classified defense information.
        (2) A process to gather, consider, and, as appropriate, 
    incorporate input from Federal agencies and industry stakeholders, 
    in accordance with subsection (d), to inform revisions to the 
    technology transfer and foreign disclosure policies and processes 
    of the Department of Defense.
        (3) Recommendations for updating the National Disclosure Policy 
    to accommodate the use of emerging and advanced defense such as 
    artificial intelligence, directed energy, microwave systems, 
    counter-unmanned aerial systems, missile defense, cybersecurity, 
    quantum technologies, hypersonics, autonomous systems, and such 
    other technologies as the Secretary determines appropriate.
        (4) Mechanisms to enable the military departments and the 
    Defense Technology Security Administration to streamline the 
    approval process for technology transfers.
        (5) Mechanisms to enhance transparency to ensure the technology 
    transfer policies of the Department of Defense and each of the 
    military departments specifically are comparable with respect to 
    capability and country release tiers for emerging and advanced 
    defense items.
        (6) A plan to consolidate technology security and foreign 
    disclosure approvals in accordance with Executive Order 14268, 
    titled ``Reforming Foreign Defense Sales to Improve Speed and 
    Accountability'' and dated April 9, 2025.
        (7) An updated Department of Defense Directive 5111.21 to 
    address roles, responsibilities and members of the Arms Transfer 
    and Technology Release Senior Steering Group of the Department of 
    Defense.
        (8) Metrics to evaluate the effectiveness of the technology 
    transfer policies of the military departments and the National 
    Disclosure Policy to enable the transfer of defense items to allies 
    and partners of the United States while ensuring protection of 
    United States technology.
        (9) An annual requirement to conduct an audit of license 
    applications that were denied during the prior year on the basis of 
    technology transfer policies of the military departments or the 
    Defense Technology Security Administration.
        (10) A description of the charter of each technology security 
    and foreign disclosure committee, its participants, and its 
    relationship to other technology security and foreign disclosure 
    committees.
    (c) Implementation.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
submission of the framework under subsection (a), and not less 
frequently than annually thereafter, the Secretary of Defense shall 
direct the Secretary of each of the military departments and the heads 
of the technology security and foreign disclosure committees to revise 
the technology transfer policy of that department and the Under 
Secretary of Defense for Policy to revise the National Disclosure 
Policy, based on the elements of the framework under subsection (b).
    (d) Stakeholder Engagement.--At least once every six months, the 
Secretaries of the military departments, the Under Secretary of Defense 
for Acquisition and Sustainment, and the Under Secretary of Defense for 
Policy shall consult with such representatives from the defense 
industry as the Secretaries and Under Secretary consider appropriate, 
including representatives from nontraditional defense contractors (as 
such term is defined by section 3014 of title 10, United States Code) 
in the course of carrying out subsections (a), (b), and (c).
    (e) Reporting Requirements.--
        (1) Submission of framework.--Not later than 180 days after the 
    date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
    submit to the congressional defense committees a report containing 
    the framework produced under subsection (a).
        (2) Annual reports.--Not later than one year after the date of 
    the submission of the framework required under subsection (a), and 
    not less frequently than annually thereafter, the Secretary of 
    Defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
    report that includes the following:
            (A) A description of any actions taken to improve the 
        technology transfer policies of the military departments and 
        the technology security and foreign disclosure committees in 
        accordance with the implementation requirements under 
        subsection (c).
            (B) A description of actions taken to implement or 
        incorporate industry recommendation into the technology 
        transfer policies of the military departments and the National 
        Disclosure Policy.
            (C) A summary of any feedback from industry stakeholders 
        with respect to current applications of the technology transfer 
        policies of the military departments and the National 
        Disclosure Policy, and a description of any actions taken to 
        address such feedback.
            (D) The results of an audit of license applications that 
        were denied during the preceding 12-month period on the basis 
        of technology transfer policies of the military departments or 
        the technology security and foreign disclosure committees, 
        including information and data that link such denials to the 
        policies in effect at the time of denial.
            (E) Any recommendations of the Secretary for legislation 
        necessary to improve technology release and foreign disclosure 
        policies of the Department of Defense.
        (3) Form.--Each report submitted under this subsection shall be 
    submitted in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.