 SB78


ENROLLED, An Act, To establish the Alabama Council on Advanced Technology and Artificial Intelligence to review and advise the Governor, the Legislature, and other interested parties on the use and development of advanced technology and artificial intelligence in this state.


BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:

 Section 1. 


(a) There is established the Alabama Council on Advanced Technology and Artificial Intelligence.


(b) The council shall review and advise the Governor and the Legislature on all aspects of the use and development of advanced technology and artificial intelligence in this state.


(c) The council shall be composed of the following members:
(1) Fourteen members appointed by the Governor.
(2) The Secretary of Commerce, or his or her designee.
(3) The Secretary of Information Technology, or his or her designee.
(4) Two members appointed by the Lieutenant Governor, at least one of whom shall be an employee, board member, or trustee of an Alabama public community college or a four-year public institution of higher education.
(5) Two members of the Alabama House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the House.
(6) Two members of the Alabama Senate appointed by the Senate President Pro Tempore.


(d) All persons appointed to the council other than legislators shall have one or more of the following qualifications: Expertise in matters relating to artificial intelligence, workforce development, technology, ethics, privacy, or computer science.


(e) Members of the council appointed by the Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall serve at the pleasure of the Governor and Lieutenant Governor, respectively. Legislative members shall serve a term concurrent with the legislative term in which they were appointed.


(f) The first meeting of the council shall be called by the Governor or his or her designee and the commission members shall elect a chair and vice chair. The council shall establish procedures and other policies necessary to carry on the business of the council, including the establishment of a quorum. The council shall meet at least twice a year, but may meet more frequently upon the call of the chair. Members of the council may participate in a meeting of the council by means of conference telephone, video conference, or similar communications equipment by means which allow all persons participating in the meeting to hear each other and otherwise participate in the meeting. Participation by any of these means shall constitute presence in person at a meeting for all purposes, including the establishment of a quorum.


(g) The appointing authorities shall coordinate their appointments so that the appointments are reflective of the diversity of gender, race, and geographical areas in this state.


(h)
(1) The members of the council, except for legislative members, shall not receive a salary or per diem allowance for serving as members of the council, but shall be entitled to reimbursement by the council for expenses in the performance of the duties of the office at the same rate allowed state employees pursuant to general law.
(2) Each legislative member of the council shall be entitled to his or her regular legislative compensation, per diem, and travel expenses for each day he or she attends a meeting of the council in accordance with Amendment 871 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, now appearing as Section 49.01 of the Official Recompilation of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended. These payments shall be paid out of any funds appropriated to the use of the Legislature by means or warrants drawn by the state Comptroller on the State Treasury.


(i) The council shall submit to the Governor and Legislature an annual report each year on any recommendations the council may have for administrative or policy action relating to advanced technology and artificial intelligence. The report shall be available electronically and posted on the website of the office of the Governor, the Legislature, and the Department of Commerce.

 Section 2. This act shall become effective one year following its passage and approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.

 President and Presiding Officer of the Senate


Speaker of the House of Representatives


SB78
Senate 04-FEB-21
I hereby certify that the within Act originated in and passed the Senate, as amended.


Patrick Harris,
Secretary.


House of Representatives
Passed: 27-APR-21


By: Senator Waggoner