 AN ACT concerning State government.
 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois, represented in the General Assembly:
 
Section 1. Short title. This Act may be cited as the Illinois Future of Work Act.
  Section 5. Findings and declaration of policy. The General Assembly hereby finds, determines, and declares the following:
(1) The future of work is a critically important conversation for those currently in the workforce as well as those looking to reenter or enter it as Illinois contemplates an equitable economic recovery from the coronavirus pandemic. 
(2) Policymakers at every level of government will be required to deal with the concurrent crises of the pandemic recovery, systemic inequities, and creating good-paying jobs. Policymakers must be able to anticipate the workforce policies and programs needed in the future to combat poverty, inequality, and climate change. 
(3) Rapid advancements in technology, specifically the automation of jobs and expanded artificial intelligence capability, have had and will continue to have a profound impact on the type, quality, and number of jobs available in our 21st century economy.
(4) Automation and the rise of artificial intelligence and predictive analytics will have major impacts on industries and their jobs; from the service sector to white collar positions, the impacts will be felt by millions of workers in the United States. 
(5) Despite the opportunities and challenges presented by rapid advancements in technology, Illinois is a leader  in the innovation and development of technology. Illinois has been an engine of progress, and it drives new products that connect people across the globe, sparking economic growth and building prosperity. 
(6) Illinois has a large, diverse, and well-educated labor force ready to meet the challenges it faces.
(7) Innovative partnerships across the private and public sectors need to be created.
  Section 10. Illinois Future of Work Task Force; duties and responsibilities.
(a) The Illinois Future of Work Task Force is created. The Task Force shall be proactive and plan for the future of work while simultaneously addressing the state of work today.
(b) The duties and responsibilities of the Task Force include the following:
(1) The Illinois Future of Work Task Force shall identify and assess the new and emerging technologies that have the potential to significantly affect employment, wages, and skill requirements.
(2) The Illinois Future of Work Task Force shall develop a set of job standards and working conditions that will ensure that future work in Illinois builds a vibrant middle class.
(3) The Illinois Future of Work Task Force shall identify the potential jobs of the future and opportunities to shape those jobs for the improvement of life for all of Illinois.
(4) The Illinois Future of Work Task Force shall compile research and best practices from other states and countries on how to deploy technology to benefit workers and the public good. 
(5) The Illinois Future of Work Task Force shall develop tools to assess the impact of proposed technologies and evaluate their costs and benefits on workers, employers, the public and the State. 
(6) The Illinois Future of Work Task Force shall identify policies and practices that will help businesses, workers, and communities thrive economically throughout the State of Illinois. 
(7) The Illinois Future of Work Task Force shall propose workforce development, training, education, and apprenticeship programs for the jobs of the future.
  Section 15. Membership; meetings.
(a) The members of the Illinois Future of Work Task Force shall include and represent the diversity of the people of Illinois, and shall be composed of the following:
(1) four members, including one representative of the business community and  one representative of the labor community, appointed by the Senate President, one of whom shall serve as co-chair;
(2) four members, including one representative of the business community and one representative of the labor community, appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate, one of whom shall serve as co-chair; 
(3) four members, including one representative of the business community and one representative of the labor community, appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, one of whom shall serve as co-chair; 
(4) four members, including one representative of the business community and one representative of the labor community, appointed by the Minority Leader of the Speaker of the House of Representatives, one of whom shall serve as co-chair; 
(5) four members, one from each of the following: the business community, the labor community, the environmental community, and the education community that advocate for job growth, appointed by the Governor; 
(6) three members appointed by the Governor whose professional expertise is at the juncture of work and workers' rights; 
(7) the Director of Labor or his or her designee;
(8) the Director of Commerce and Economic Opportunity or his or her designee; 
(9) the Director of Employment Security or his or her designee;
(10) the Superintendent of the State Board of Education or his or her designee; 
(11) the Executive Director of the Illinois Community College Board or his or her designee; and 
(12) the Executive Director of the Board of Higher Education or his or her designee. 
(b) Appointments for the Illinois Future of Work Task Force must be finalized by August
31, 2021. The Illinois Future of Work Task Force shall hold one meeting per month for a total of 7 meetings, and the first meeting must be held within 30 days after appointments are finalized.
(c) Members of the Illinois Future of Work Task Force shall serve without compensation.
         (d) The Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity shall provide administrative support to the Task Force.
  Section 20. Report; dissolution.
(a) The Illinois Future of Work Task Force shall issue a report based upon its findings in the course of performing its duties and responsibilities specified under Section 10. The report shall be written by an independent authority with subject matter expertise on the future of work.
(b) The Illinois Future of Work Task Force shall submit its final report to the Governor and the General Assembly no later than May 1, 2022, and is dissolved upon the filing of its report.
 
Section 25. Repeal. This Act is repealed on January 1, 2024.
 
Section 99. Effective date. This Act takes effect upon becoming law.