 S. 1577


To require the appointment or designation of emerging technology leads in certain Federal agencies.


IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES


May 11, 2023


Mr. Bennet introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs


A BILL
To require the appointment or designation of emerging technology leads in certain Federal agencies.


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,

 SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.


This Act may be cited as the “Oversee Emerging Technology Act”.

 SEC. 2. EMERGING TECHNOLOGY LEADS.


(a) Definitions.—In this section:


(1) COVERED AGENCY.—The term “covered agency” means—


(A) an agency listed in section 901(b) of title 31, United States Code; or


(B) an element of the intelligence community, as defined in section 3 of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003).


(2) COVERED INDIVIDUAL.—The term “covered individual” means—


(A) an individual serving in a Senior Executive Service position, as that term is defined in section 3132 of title 5, United States Code;


(B) an individual who—


(i) is serving in a position to which section 5376 of title 5, United States Code, applies; and


(ii) has a significant amount of seniority and experience, as determined by the head of the applicable covered agency; and


(C) another individual who is the equivalent of an individual described in subparagraph (A) or (B), as determined by the head of the applicable covered agency.

 (b) Appointment Or Designation.—The head of each covered agency that is substantially engaged in the development, application, or oversight of emerging technologies shall appoint or designate a covered individual as an emerging technology lead to—


(1) advise the covered agency on the responsible use of emerging technologies, including artificial intelligence;


(2) provide expertise on responsible policies and practices;


(3) collaborate with interagency coordinating bodies; and


(4) provide input for procurement policies.

 (c) Informing Congress.—Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall—


(1) inform Congress of each covered agency for which a covered individual has been appointed or designated as an emerging technology lead under subsection (b); and


(2) provide to Congress a description of the authorities and responsibilities of the covered individuals described in paragraph (1).