 SEC. 941. REPORTING RELATED TO THE AUKUS PARTNERSHIP.


(a) Report On Instruments.—


(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 30 days after the signature, conclusion, or other finalization of any non-binding instrument related to the AUKUS partnership, the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees the text of such instrument.


(2) NON-DUPLICATION OF EFFORTS; RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—To the extent the text of a non-binding instrument is submitted to the appropriate congressional committees pursuant to subsection (a), such text does not need to be submitted to Congress pursuant to section 112b(a)(1)(A)(ii) of title 1, United States Code, as amended by section 5947 of the James M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023 (Public Law 117–263; 136 Stat. 3476). Paragraph (1) shall not be construed to relieve the executive branch of any other requirement of section 112b of title 1, United States Code, as amended so amended, or any other provision of law.


(3) DEFINITIONS.—In this section:


(A) IN GENERAL.—The term “text”, with respect to a non-binding instrument, includes—


(i) any annex, appendix, codicil, side agreement, side letter, or any document of similar purpose or function to the aforementioned, regardless of the title of the document, that is entered into contemporaneously and in conjunction with the non-binding instrument; and


(ii) any implementing agreement or arrangement, or any document of similar purpose or function to the aforementioned, regardless of the title of the document, that is entered into contemporaneously and in conjunction with the non-binding instrument.


(B) CONTEMPORANEOUSLY AND IN CONJUNCTION WITH.—As used in subparagraph (A), the term “contemporaneously and in conjunction with”—


(i) shall be construed liberally; and


(ii) may not be interpreted to require any action to have occurred simultaneously or on the same day.

 (b) Report On AUKUS Partnership.—


(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and biennially thereafter, the Secretary, in coordination with the Secretary of Defense and other appropriate heads of agencies, shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on the AUKUS partnership.


(2) ELEMENTS.—Each report required under paragraph (1) shall include the following elements:


(A) STRATEGY.—


(i) An identification of the defensive military capability gaps and capacity shortfalls that the AUKUS partnership seeks to offset.


(ii) An explanation of the total cost to the United States associated with Pillar One of the AUKUS partnership.


(iii) A detailed explanation of how enhanced access to the industrial base of Australia is contributing to strengthening the United States strategic position in Asia.


(iv) A detailed explanation of the military and strategic benefit provided by the improved access provided by naval bases of Australia.


(v) A detailed assessment of how Australia’s sovereign conventionally armed nuclear attack submarines contribute to United States defense and deterrence objectives in the Indo-Pacific region.

 (B) IMPLEMENT THE AUKUS PARTNERSHIP.—


(i) Progress made on achieving the Optimal Pathway established for Australia’s development of conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarines, including the following elements:


(I) A description of progress made by Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States to conclude an Article 14 arrangement with the International Atomic Energy Agency.


(II) A description of the status of efforts of Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States to build the supporting infrastructure to base conventionally armed, nuclear-powered attack submarines.


(III) Updates on the efforts by Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States to train a workforce that can build, sustain, and operate conventionally armed, nuclear-powered attack submarines.


(IV) A description of progress in establishing submarine support facilities capable of hosting rotational forces in western Australia by 2027.


(V) A description of progress made in improving United States submarine production capabilities that will enable the United States to meet—


(aa) its objectives of providing up to five Virginia Class submarines to Australia by the early to mid-2030’s; and


(bb) United States submarine production requirements.


(ii) Progress made on Pillar Two of the AUKUS partnership, including the following elements:


(I) An assessment of the efforts of Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States to enhance collaboration across the following eight trilateral lines of effort:


(aa) Underseas capabilities.


(bb) Quantum technologies.


(cc) Artificial intelligence and autonomy.


(dd) Advanced cyber capabilities.


(ee) Hypersonic and counter-hypersonic capabilities.


(ff) Electronic warfare.


(gg) Innovation.


(hh) Information sharing.


(II) An assessment of any new lines of effort established.