SEC. 6721. REPORTS ON INTEGRATION OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WITHIN INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY.

(a) Reports by Elements of Intelligence Community.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, each senior official within an element of the intelligence community identified as a designated element lead pursuant to section 6702(b) shall submit to the congressional intelligence committees, the Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, and the Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives a report on the efforts of that element to develop, acquire, adopt, and maintain artificial intelligence to improve intelligence collection and analysis and optimize internal work flows. Each such report shall include the following:
	(1) A description of the authorities of the element relating to the use of artificial intelligence.
	(2) A list of any resource or authority necessary to accelerate the adoption by the element of artificial intelligence solutions, including commercial products, or personnel authorities.
	(3) A description of the element's roles, responsibilities, and authorities for accelerating the adoption by the element of artificial intelligence solutions.
	(4) The application of the policies and principles described in section 6702(a)(2) to paragraphs (1), (2), and (3).
(b) Audits by Inspectors General.--
	(1) Audits.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, each inspector general with oversight responsibility for an element of the intelligence community shall conduct and audit, and brief congressional intelligence committees, the Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, and the Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives the findings of the audit, to evaluate the following:
		(A) The efforts of such element to develop, acquire, adopt, and maintain artificial intelligence capabilities for the purpose of improving intelligence collection and analysis in a timely manner and the extent to which such efforts are consistent with the policies and principles described in section 6702(a)(2);
		(B) The degree to which the element has implemented each of the provisions of this title.
		(C) Any administrative or technical barriers to the accelerated adoption of artificial intelligence by such element.	(2) Input required.--The results of each audit under paragraph (1) shall be disaggregated by, and include input from, organizational units of the respective element of the intelligence community that focus on the following:
		(A) Acquisitions and contracting.
		(B) Personnel and workforce matters.
		(C) Financial management and budgeting.
		(D) Operations and capabilities.
	(3) Audit of office of director of national intelligence.--
With respect to the audit of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence conducted by the Inspector General of the Intelligence Community under paragraph (1), the Inspector General shall also audit the extent to which the Director of National Intelligence coordinates across the intelligence community for the purpose of ensuring the adoption of best practices, the use of shared contracting vehicles for products and services that meet common requirements, the sharing of information, and the efficient use of resources, relating to artificial intelligence.
(c) Annual Report by Director of National Intelligence.--
	(1) Reports.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for 3 years, the Director of National Intelligence, in consultation with the heads of the elements of the intelligence community, shall submit to the congressional intelligence committees, the Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, and the Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives a report on the progress of the adoption of artificial intelligence within the intelligence community.	(2) Matters.--Each report under paragraph (1) shall include, with respect to the year covered by the report, the following:
		(A) A detailed description of the progress of each element of the intelligence community in the adoption and maintenance of artificial intelligence during such year, including a detailed description of any--
			(i) artificial intelligence programs or systems adopted by the element;
			(ii) contracts entered into by the head of the element with small- or medium-sized emerging technology companies for commercial products involving artificial intelligence; and
			(iii) relevant positions established or filled within the element.
		(B) A description of any policies of the intelligence community issued during such year that relate to the adoption of artificial intelligence within the intelligence community, including an assessment of the compliance with such policies by the elements of the intelligence community.		(C) A list of recommendations for the efficient, accelerated, and comprehensive adoption of artificial intelligence across the intelligence community during the year following the year covered by the report, including any technological advances in artificial intelligence that the intelligence community should leverage from industry actors.
		(D) An overview of the advances of foreign adversaries in the field of artificial intelligence, and steps that may be taken to ensure the United States Government outpaces foreign adversaries in such field.
		(E) Any gaps in resource or authorities, or other administrative or technical barriers, to the adoption of artificial intelligence by the intelligence community.
		(F) Such other matters as the Director may determine appropriate.
	(3) Form.--Each report under paragraph (1) may be submitted in classified form.
	(4) Entry by chief data officer.--Each report under paragraph (1) shall include an entry by the Intelligence Community Chief Data Officer that addresses each of the matters specified in paragraph (2) with respect to the organization of data for the accelerated adoption of artificial intelligence solutions.