A BILL
To require the Secretary of Health and Human Services to implement a pandemic preparedness and response program using artificial intelligence.


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,


SECTION 1. Short title.


This Act may be cited as the “MedShield Act of 2024”.


SEC. 2. Findings; sense of Congress.


(a) Findings.—Congress finds as follows:


(1) The COVID–19 pandemic revealed the need to better organize pathogen defense of the people of the United States.


(2) The National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence concluded that COVID–19 scientific advancements, notably accelerated by the application of artificial intelligence, in addition to many other existing science and technology initiatives in the United States, should be used to build a comprehensive, operational, and integrated biodefense program that functions like a “shield” against manmade and non-manmade pathogens.


(b) Sense of Congress.—It is the sense of Congress that—


(1) an initiative such as Operation Warp Speed should not be required for the next pandemic;


(2) there is a requirement for a pandemic preparedness and response program that would negate the need for a future Operation Warp Speed-like program or a declaration of a public health emergency under section 319 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 247d); and


(3) the program established under section 3 would operationalize artificial intelligence and a system-of-systems integration across the interagency and private sector, under the direction of the Secretary of Health and Human Services.

SEC. 3. Establishment of MedShield program.


(a) In general.—The Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this Act as the “Secretary”) shall implement a pandemic preparedness and response program utilizing artificial intelligence and other relevant technologies, to be known as the “MedShield program” (referred to in this Act as the “Program”), in accordance with recommendations of the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence. The Program shall operationalize a national medical shield that gathers innovations across the public-private ecosystem in the United States, as well as from allies and partners, to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of delivering medical solutions to individuals, functioning as a shield against biological threats. The Program shall continuously operate and monitor threats, for the purpose of safeguarding the public health of the United States.


(b) Plan and integration.—Pursuant to the Program, the Secretary shall—


(1) develop a plan to integrate the recommendations of the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence for pandemic preparedness and response, in accordance with the responsibilities of the Department of Health and Human Services as the primary agency and coordinator for the emergency support function relating to public health and medical services under the National Response Framework of the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and


(2) consult with heads of appropriate Federal agencies and select allies and partners to ensure the integration of the Program between relevant departments and agencies and international partners to achieve a coordinated international effort to address a pandemic.


(c) Utilization of artificial intelligence.—In carrying out the Program, the Secretary shall leverage artificial intelligence and other relevant technologies and capabilities, including as follows:


(1) Development and deployment of a global pathogen surveillance system for the real-time detection and tracking of pathogens.


(2) Employment of artificial intelligence enabled systems to accelerate the identification and development of effective vaccines.


(3) Development and deployment of therapeutic treatments for individuals affected by biological threats.


(4) Advanced artificial intelligence-enabled modeling to optimize strategies for pathogen tracking, vaccine distribution, and therapeutic interventions.


(5) Streamlining and enhancing rapid manufacturing of vaccines and therapeutics.

SEC. 4. Reporting.


Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives a report detailing the plan required under section 3(b). Such report shall be submitted in unclassified form, and may include a classified annex.


SEC. 5. Definitions.


In this Act—


(1) the term “artificial intelligence” has the meaning given such term in section 1051(f) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115–232; 132 Stat. 1962);


(2) the term “MedShield” has the meaning given the term “BioShield” in the final report of the Commission submitted under section 1051(c)(2) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (132 Stat. 1965; Public Law 115–232); and


(3) the term “National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence” means such commission established under section 1051 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (132 Stat. 1962; Public Law 115–232).

SEC. 6. Authorization of appropriations.


For purposes of carrying out the MedShield program, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary—


(1) $300,000,000 for fiscal year 2025;


(2) $350,000,000 for fiscal year 2026;


(3) $400,000,000 for fiscal year 2027;


(4) $450,000,000 for fiscal year 2028; and


(5) $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2029,


to remain available until expended.