A BILL


To amend the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 to clarify that the prohibition under such Act against the fraudulent misrepresentation of campaign authority and the fraudulent solicitation of funds includes misrepresentation through the use of content generated in whole or in part with the use of artificial intelligence (generative AI), and for other purposes.


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,


SECTION 1. Short title.


This Act may be cited as the “AI Ads Act”.

SEC. 2. Use of content generated by artificial intelligence as fraudulent misrepresentation of campaign authority.


(a) Fraudulent misrepresentation.—Section 322(a)(1) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (52 U.S.C. 30124(a)(1)) is amended by striking the semicolon and inserting the following: “, including through the use of content generated in whole or in part with the use of artificial intelligence (generative AI);”.


(b) Fraudulent solicitation of funds.—Section 322(b)(1) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (52 U.S.C. 30124(b)(1)) is amended by striking the semicolon and inserting the following: “, including through the use of content generated in whole or in part with the use of artificial intelligence (generative AI);”.

SEC. 3. Extending prohibition against fraudulent misrepresentation by candidates for purposes of damaging other candidates to fraudulent misrepresentation of candidates and committees by any person for any purpose.


(a) Fraudulent misrepresentation.—Section 322(a) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (52 U.S.C. § 30124(a)) is amended—


(1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking “who is a candidate for Federal office or an employee or agent of such a candidate” ; and


(2) in paragraph (1), by striking “any other candidate or political party or employee or agent thereof on a matter which is damaging to such other candidate or political party or employee or agent thereof” and inserting “any candidate, political party, or other real or fictitious political committee or organization, or employee or agent of such a candidate, political party, or political committee or organization”.


(b) Fraudulent solicitation of funds.—Section 322(b)(1) of such Act (52 U.S.C. 30124(b)(1)) is amended by striking “any candidate or political party or employee or agent thereof” and inserting “any candidate, political party, or other real or fictitious political committee or organization, or employee or agent of such a candidate, political party, or political committee or organization”.