
A BILL
To require the Secretary of Defense to carry out a pilot program on using artificial intelligence-enabled software to optimize the workflow and operations of depots, shipyards, and other manufacturing facilities run by the Department of Defense, and for other purposes.

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. Department of Defense pilot program on use of artificial intelligence.

(a) Pilot program required.—Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall commence carrying out a pilot program to assess the feasibility and advisability of using artificial intelligence-enabled software to optimize the workflow and operations for—

(1) depots, shipyards, or other manufacturing facilities run by the Department of Defense; and

(2) contract administration for the Department, including the adjudication and review of contracts managed by the Defense Contract Management Agency.

(b) Software.—In carrying out the pilot program required by subsection (a), the Secretary shall—

(1) use best in breed software platforms;

(2) consider industry best practices in the selection of software programs;

(3) be implemented based on human centered design practices to best identify the business needs for improvement; and

(4) demonstrate connection to enterprise platforms of record with relevant data sources.

(c) Minimum expenditures.—In carrying out the pilot program required by subsection (a), the Secretary shall expend or obligate not less than $35,000,000.

(d) Consultation.—The Secretary shall carry out the pilot program required by subsection (a)(1) in consultation with the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, the Secretary of the Army, Secretary of the Navy, and Secretary of the Air Force.

(e) Report.—Not later than one year after the date of the commencement of the pilot program pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate and the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives a report containing the following information:

(1) An evaluation of each software platform used in the pilot program.

(2) An analysis of how workflows and operations were modified as part of the pilot program.

(3) A quantitative assessment of the impact the software had at each of the locations in which the pilot program was carried out.