SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the “Artificial Intelligence Public Awareness and Education Campaign Act”.
SEC. 2. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PUBLIC AWARENESS AND EDUCATION CAMPAIGN.
(a) Definitions.—In this section:
(1) AI CAMPAIGN.—The term “AI Campaign” means the public awareness and education campaign conducted under this section.
(2) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.—The term “artificial intelligence” has the meaning given the term in section 5002 of the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020 (15 U.S.C. 9401).
(3) FEDERAL AGENCY.—The term “Federal agency” has the meaning given the term “agency” in section 551 of title 5, United States Code.
(4) KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATOR.—The term “key performance indicator” means a quantifiable metric that demonstrates how effectively an initiative is at achieving its objectives.
(5) RELEVANT CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES.—The term “relevant congressional committees” means—
(A) the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate; and
(B) the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology of the House of Representatives.
(6) SECRETARY.—The term “Secretary” means the Secretary of Commerce.
(b) AI Campaign.—Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in coordination with the heads of relevant Federal agencies, including the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology and the Administrator of the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, shall conduct a public awareness and education campaign to provide information regarding the benefits of, risks relating to, and the prevalence of artificial intelligence in the daily lives of individuals in the United States.
(c) Outreach.—In carrying out the AI Campaign, the Secretary shall—
(1) determine the key performance indicators to evaluate the effectiveness of the AI Campaign and obtain any baseline data necessary for a comparative measurement of success;
(2) facilitate access to, and the exchange of, information regarding artificial intelligence in order to promote up-to-date knowledge regarding artificial intelligence and the rights of an individual under law with respect to artificial intelligence;
(3) identify, promote, and encourage the use of best practices for the detection of provenance information with respect to digital media by—
(A) including such media that is generated by human beings and such media that is generated or significantly modified by algorithms, including artificial intelligence, including media commonly referred to as “deepfakes” and content created by the programs commonly referred to as “chatbots”;
(B) providing resources and guidance on available tools and methods for detecting or differentiating such media; and
(C) identifying populations particularly susceptible to artificial intelligence-enabled fraudulent activitiy, including senior citizens, and conducting target outreach to inform such populations of, and inoculate such populations against, artificial intelligence-enabled scams and fraud;
(4) conduct outreach to the general public relating to the prevalence of artificial intelligence in the daily lives of individuals in the United States, including—
(A) applications that enable increase the productivity of individuals, such as text-to-speech functionality, real-time route planning, and predictive text suggestions; and
(B) applications in use commercially, such as automated decision-making, fraud detection, and financial trading; and
(5) conduct outreach about workforce opportunities, including opportunities to work in the Federal Government, for technologists and others with experience in the development, deployment, and use of artificial intelligence, including to institutions of higher education (as defined in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001).
(d) Expert Consultation.—In conducting the AI Campaign, the Secretary shall consult with a variety of stakeholders from academic or research communities, public-private partnerships, and private industry, including companies with different roles in the use of artificial intelligence, developers, deployers, users, and community development organizations with expertise working with artificial intelligence.(e) Report.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 1 year after the date on which the Secretary initiates the AI Campaign, the Secretary shall submit to the relevant congressional committees a report on the activities conducted under the AI Campaign.
(2) CONTENTS.—The report required under paragraph (1) shall include—
(A) the key performance indicators determined for the purpose of evaluating the overall effectiveness of the AI Campaign; and
(B) recommendations for subsequent actions, including in any key areas in which the outcomes of the AI Campaign were identified as insufficient.
(f) No Additional Funds.—No additional funds are authorized to be appropriated for the purpose of carrying out this Act.