SEC. 152.  TRANSFER OF RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS RELATING TO ELECTROMAGNETIC AND SPECTRUM OPERATIONS. 

(a) TRANSFER.—Not later than two years after the date of the enactment of this Act and in accordance with the plan developed pursuant to subsection (b), the Secretary of Defense shall transfer to an appropriate entity within the Department of Defense all the responsibilities and functions of the Commander of the United States Strategic Command that are germane to electromagnetic spectrum operations (EMSO), including— 
(1) advocacy for joint electronic warfare capabilities; 
(2) providing contingency electronic warfare support to other combatant commands; and 
(3) supporting combatant command joint training and planning related to electromagnetic spectrum operations. 
(b) PLAN FOR TRANSFER OF RESPONSIBILITIES.— 
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 180 days before the date of the transfer of responsibilities required by subsection (a), the Secretary shall develop a plan to carry out the transfer. 
(2) CONSIDERATIONS.—In developing the plan required by paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consider the following: 
(A) All appropriate entities having potential for designation as the receiving electromagnetic spectrum operations organization, including elements of the Joint Staff, the functional and geographic combatant commands, Department of Defense offices and agencies, and other organizations, including the establishment of a new entity for that purpose within any such entity. 
(B) Whether the receiving electromagnetic spectrum operations organization should have a unitary structure or hybrid structure (in which operational and capability development and direction are headed by separate organizations). 
(C) The resources required by the receiving electromagnetic spectrum operations organization to fulfill the responsibilities and functions specified in subsection (a). 
(D) The results of the evaluations carried out pursuant to subsections (c) and (d). (3) SUBMITTAL TO CONGRESS.—Not later than 180 days before the date of the transfer of responsibilities required by subsection (a), the Secretary shall submit to Congress the fol.lowing: 
(A) The plan developed under paragraph (1). 
(B) The construct and elements of the receiving electromagnetic spectrum operations organization under the plan, including the allocation of responsibilities among senior officials in such organization. 
(C) The analysis conducted to determine the electromagnetic spectrum operations organization, including the input in the plan or analysis of the results of consultation with any independent entities involved in development of the plan. 
(D) The resources required to implement the plan, and a timeline for the receiving electromagnetic spectrum operations organization to reach initial operational capability and full operational capability. 
(c) EVALUATIONS OF ARMED FORCES.— 
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than October 1, 2021, and annually thereafter through 2025, the Chief of Staff of the Army, the Chief of Naval Operations, the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, the Commandant of the Marine Corps, and the Chief of Space Operations shall each carry out an evaluation of the ability of the Armed Force concerned to perform electromagnetic spectrum operations missions required by each of the following: 
(A) The Electromagnetic Spectrum Superiority Strategy. 
(B) The Joint Staff-developed concept of operations for electromagnetic spectrum operations. 
(C) The operations and contingency plans of the combatant commands. 
(2) ELEMENTS.—Each evaluation under paragraph (1) shall include assessment of the following: 
(A) Current programs of record, including— 
(i) the ability of weapon systems to perform missions in contested electromagnetic spectrum environments; and 
(ii) the ability of electronic warfare capabilities to disrupt adversary operations. 
(B) Future programs of record, including— 
(i) the need for distributed or network-centric electronic warfare and signals intelligence capabilities; and 
(ii) the need for automated and machine learning-or artificial intelligence-assisted electronic warfare capabilities. 
(C) Order of battle. 
(D) Individual and unit training. 
(E) Tactics, techniques, and procedures, including— 
(i) maneuver, distribution of assets, and the use of decoys; and 
(ii) integration of nonkinetic and kinetic fires. 
(d) EVALUATIONS OF COMBATANT COMMANDS.— 
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than October 1, 2021, and annually thereafter through 2025, the Commander of the United States European Command, the Commander of the United States Pacific Command, and the Commander of the United States Central Command shall each carry out an evaluation of the plans and posture of the command concerned to execute the electromagnetic spectrum operations envisioned in each of the following: 
(A) The Electromagnetic Spectrum Superiority Strategy. 
(B) The Joint Staff-developed concept of operations for electromagnetic spectrum operations. 
(2) ELEMENTS.—Each evaluation under paragraph (1) shall include assessment of the following: 
(A) Operation and contingency plans. 
(B) The manning, organizational alignment, and capability of joint electromagnetic spectrum operations cells. 
(C) Mission rehearsal and exercises. 
(D) Force positioning, posture, and readiness. 

(e) SEMIANNUAL BRIEFING.—Not less frequently than twice each year until January 1, 2026, the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall brief the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of Representatives on the implementation of this section by each of the Joint Staff, the Armed Forces, and the combatant commands. 