SEC. 248. PILOT PROGRAM ON SELF-DIRECTED TRAINING IN ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES. 

(a) ONLINE COURSES.—The Secretary of Defense shall carry out a pilot program under which the Secretary makes available a list of approved online courses relating to advanced technologies that may be taken by civilian employees of the Department of Defense and members of the Armed Forces on a voluntary basis while not engaged in the performance of their duties. 

(b) PROCEDURES.—The Secretary shall establish procedures for the development, selection, approval, adoption, and evaluation of online courses under subsection (a) to ensure that such courses are supportive of the goals of this section and overall goals for the training and education of the civilian and military workforce of the Department of Defense. 
(c) DOCUMENTATION OF COMPLETION.—The Secretary of Defense shall develop and implement a system— 
(1) to confirm whether a civilian employee of the Department of Defense or member of the Armed Forces has completed an online course approved by the Secretary under subsection (a); and 
(2) to document the completion of such course by such employee or member. 

(d) INCENTIVES.—The Secretary of Defense shall develop and implement incentives to encourage civilian employees of the Department of Defense and members of the Armed Forces to complete online courses approved by the Secretary under subsection (a). 
(e) METRICS.—The Secretary of Defense shall develop metrics to evaluate whether, and to what extent, the pilot program under this section improves the ability of participants— 
(1) to perform job-related functions; and 
(2) to execute relevant missions of the Department of Defense. 

(f) ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES DEFINED.—In this section, the term ‘‘advanced technologies’’ means technologies that the Secretary of Defense determines to be in high-demand within the Department of Defense and to which significant research and development efforts are devoted, including technologies such as artificial intelligence, data science, machine learning, fifth-generation telecommunications technology, and biotechnology. 

(g) DEADLINE.—The Secretary of Defense shall carry out the activities described in subsections (a) through (e) not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act. 

(h) SUNSET.—This section shall terminate on October 1, 2024.