AN ACT to amend 1976 PA 388, entitled “An act to regulate political activity; to regulate campaign financing; to restrict campaign contributions and expenditures; to require campaign statements and reports; to regulate anonymous contributions; to regulate campaign advertising and literature; to provide for segregated funds for political purposes; to provide for the use of public funds for political purposes; to create certain funds; to provide for reversion, retention, or refunding of unexpended balances in certain funds; to require other statements and reports; to regulate acceptance of certain gifts, payments, and reimbursements; to prescribe the powers and duties of certain state departments and state and local officials and employees; to provide appropriations; to prescribe penalties and provide remedies; and to repeal certain acts and parts of acts,” by amending section 2 (MCL 169.202), as amended by 2001 PA 250.


The People of the State of Michigan enact:


Sec. 2. (1) “Artificial intelligence” means a machine-based system that can, for a given set of human-defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual environments, and that uses machine and human-based inputs to do all of the following:


(a) Perceive real and virtual environments.


(b) Abstract such perceptions into models through analysis in an automated manner.


(c) Use model inference to formulate options for information or action.


(2) “Award” means a plaque, trophy, certificate, bust, ceremonial gavel, or memento.


(3) “Ballot question” means a question that is submitted or is intended to be submitted to a popular vote at an election whether or not it qualifies for the ballot.


(4) “Ballot question committee” means a committee acting in support of, or in opposition to, the qualification, passage, or defeat of a ballot question but that does not receive contributions or make expenditures or contributions for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence the action of the voters for or against the nomination or election of a candidate.


(5) “Bundle” means for a bundling committee to deliver 1 or more contributions from individuals to the candidate committee of a candidate for statewide elective office, without the money becoming money of the bundling committee.


(6) “Bundling committee” means an independent committee or political committee that makes an expenditure to solicit or collect from individuals contributions that are to be part of a bundled contribution, which expenditure is required to be reported as an in-kind expenditure for a candidate for statewide elective office.


(7) “Business” means a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, activity, or entity that is organized for profit or nonprofit purposes.


 Enacting section 1. This amendatory act does not take effect unless House Bill No. 5141 of the 102nd Legislature is enacted into law.