Sec. 2.  (1) For purposes of this section:
(a) Department means the State Department of Education; and
(b) Eligible applicant means a privately owned business based in Nebraska
that is in the process of researching artificial-intelligence-based writing
assistance that can be used to assist individuals with dyslexia.
(2) The Dyslexia Research Grant Program is created and shall be
administered by the department.
(3)(a) An eligible applicant may apply to the department for a grant under
the Dyslexia Research Grant Program. The department shall prescribe the
application form that is to be completed when applying for a grant under the
Dyslexia Research Grant Program. The grant shall be conditioned on compliance
with this section.
(b) Except as provided in subdivision (c) of this subsection, the
department may award a grant to any eligible applicant.
(c) The total amount of all grants awarded under the Dyslexia Research
Grant Program shall not be more than five hundred thousand dollars. It is the
intent of the Legislature that grants awarded pursuant to this section shall be
funded from the Education Future Fund.
(4) All grant money received under the Dyslexia Research Grant Program
shall be used only for the purpose of researching the use of artificial
intelligence-based writing assistance by individuals with dyslexia. Such
research shall be focused on using aggregate writing analytics to identify
writing errors and patterns that can be used by teachers to develop a
comprehensive literacy plan for students with dyslexia.
(5)(a) If any grant money received under the Dyslexia Research Grant
Program is used in violation of subsection (4) of this section, the department
shall notify the Attorney General of such violation.
(b) The Attorney General shall bring a civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction to recoup any money spent in violation of subsection (4)
of this section. Any money collected in such civil action shall be remitted to
the State Treasurer for credit to the Education Future Fund.
(6) The State Board of Education may adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations to carry out this section.