Sec. 143. (Effective July 1, 2024) (a) For the fiscal year ending June 30, 2025, the Department of Education shall administer an artificial intelligence education tool pilot program. Under such pilot program, the Commissioner of Education shall award a grant to assist such boards in implementing an existing artificial intelligence tool, selected by the commissioner, that will be used by educators and students for classroom instruction and student learning.
(b) The commissioner shall select five local or regional boards of education to participate in the pilot program, provided such participation includes at least one rural school district, one suburban school district and one urban school district and reflects the racial and ethnic diversity of the state. The commissioner and each such participating board of education shall jointly select the grade level in which such artificial intelligence tool will be implemented in the school district, provided such grade level is grade seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven or twelve.
(c) Such artificial intelligence tool shall comply with the laws governing the use of artificial intelligence and the protection of student data and privacy, including, but not limited to, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, 20 USC 1232g, as amended from time to time, and sections 10-234aa to 10-234gg, inclusive, of the general statutes.
(d) As used in this section, "artificial intelligence" means any technology, including, but not limited to, machine learning that uses data to train an algorithm or predictive model for the purpose of enabling a computer system or service to autonomously perform any task, including, but not limited to, visual perception, language processing or speech recognition, that is normally associated with human intelligence or perception.
Sec. 144. (Effective July 1, 2024) For the fiscal year ending June 30, 2025, the Department of Education shall provide professional development for educators employed by the local and regional boards of education participating in the artificial intelligence education tool pilot program pursuant to section 143 of this act. Such professional development shall include, but not be limited to, (1) training on how to properly and safely utilize the artificial intelligence tool selected for such pilot program as part of instruction in the classroom, (2) how such artificial intelligence tool can benefit (A) educators in classroom instruction, and (B) students in learning, academic achievement and workforce development, and (3) the laws governing the use of artificial intelligence and the protection of student data and privacy, including, but not limited to, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, 20 USC 1232g, as amended from time to time, and sections 10-234aa to 10-234gg, inclusive, of the general statutes. As used in this section, "artificial intelligence" means any technology, including, but not limited to, machine learning that uses data to train an algorithm or predictive model for the purpose of enabling a computer system or service to autonomously perform any task, including, but not limited to, visual perception, language processing or speech recognition, that is normally associated with human intelligence or perception.