SEC. 1069. Biodefense posture reviews.

(a) Strategy and implementation plan required.--Not later than December 31, 2026, and December 31, 2029, the Secretary of Defense shall conduct a comprehensive examination of the biodefense policies, practices, programs, and initiatives of the Department of Defense.

(b) Elements.--Each review conducted under subsection (a) shall include each of the following:

(1) An inventory and assessment of all existing strategies, plans, policies, laws, and interagency agreements of the Department of Defense related to biodefense, including prevention, deterrence, preparedness, detection, response, attribution, recovery, and mitigation.

(2) An identification of relevant biological threats, including biological warfare, bioterrorism, naturally occurring infectious diseases, and accidental exposures.

(3) An identification of the current programs, efforts, or activities of the Department of Defense with respect to--

(A) preventing the acquisition, proliferation, and use of a biological weapon;

(B) preventing an accidental or naturally occurring biological outbreak; and

(C) mitigating the effects of a biological epidemic.

(4) An identification of the roles and responsibilities of the elements of the Department of Defense, including internal and external coordination procedures, in identifying and sharing information related to, warning of, and regarding protection against, acts of terrorism using biological agents and weapons and accidental or naturally occurring biological outbreaks.

(5) An identification of methods in use by the Department to address biological attacks with emerging artificial intelligence and cyber capabilities.

(6) An identification of related or required capabilities and activities required to support the national biodefense strategy.

(7) Recommendations for strengthening and improving the current biodefense capabilities, authorities, and command structures of the Department.

(8) Recommendations for improving and formalizing interagency coordination and support mechanisms with respect to providing a robust national biodefense.

(9) Any other matters the Secretary of Defense determines necessary.

(c) Submittal to Congress.--

(1) IN GENERAL.--Not later than 30 days after the completion of a review under subsection (a), the Secretary shall--

(A) provide to the congressional defense committees a briefing on the review; and

(B) submit to the congressional defense committees a copy of the review.

(2) FORM OF REVIEW.--Each review submitted under paragraph (1) shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.