3. Human-centered Artificial Intelligence (AI)


17. Recognizing the efforts undertaken so far by all stakeholders in their respective roles including governments, international organizations, academia, civil society and the private sector, and mindful of how technology impacts society, the G20 endeavors to provide an enabling environment for human-centered AI that promotes innovation and investment, with a particular focus on digital entrepreneurship, research and development, scaling up of startups in this area, and adoption of AI by MSMEs which face disproportionally higher costs to adopt AI.


18. We recognize that AI technologies can help promote inclusive economic growth, bring great benefits to society, and empower individuals. The responsible development and use of AI can be a driving force to help advance the SDGs and to realize a sustainable and inclusive society, mitigating risks to wider societal values. The benefits brought by the responsible use of AI can improve the work environment and quality of life, and create potential for realizing a human centered future society with opportunities for everyone, including women and girls as well as vulnerable groups.


19. At the same time, we also recognize that AI, like other emerging technologies, may present societal challenges, including the transitions in the labor market, privacy, security, ethical issues, new digital divides and the need for AI capacity building. To foster public trust and confidence in AI technologies and fully realize their potential, we are committed to a human centered approach to AI, guided by the G20 AI Principles drawn from the OECD Recommendation on AI, which are attached in Annex and are non-binding. This Annex includes the following principles of “inclusive growth, sustainable development and well-being”, “humancentered values and fairness”, “transparency and explainability”, “robustness, security and safety” and “accountability”. The Annex also offers guidance for consideration by policy makers with the purpose of maximizing and sharing the benefits from AI, while minimizing the risks and concerns, with special attention to international cooperation and inclusion of developing countries and underrepresented populations.


20. In pursuing human-centered AI, G20 members recognize the need to continue to promote the protection of privacy and personal data consistent with applicable frameworks. The G20 also recognizes the need to promote AI capacity building and skills development. We will each continue to strive for international cooperation and endeavor to work together with appropriate fora in areas such as research and development, policy development and information sharing through the G20 Repository of Digital Policies and other open and collaborative efforts.