Subtitle B--Matters Relating to the AUKUS Partnership
SEC. 1321. DEFINITIONS.

In this subtitle:
	(1) Appropriate congressional committees.--Except as otherwise provided, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
		(A) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate; and
		(B) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives.
	(2) AUKUS partnership.--
		(A) In general.--The term ``AUKUS partnership'' means the enhanced trilateral security partnership between Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States announced in September 2021.
		(B) Pillars.--The AUKUS partnership includes the following two pillars:
			(i) Pillar One is focused on developing a pathway for Australia to acquire conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarines.
			(ii) Pillar Two is focused on enhancing trilateral collaboration on advanced defense capabilities, including hypersonic and counter hypersonic capabilities, quantum technologies, undersea technologies, and artificial intelligence.
	(3) International traffic in arms regulations.--The term ``International Traffic in Arms Regulations'' means subchapter M of chapter I of title 22, Code of Federal Regulations (or successor regulations).
PART 1--ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SEC. 1331. AUKUS PARTNERSHIP OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY FRAMEWORK.

(a) Senior Advisor.--
	(1) Designation.--
		(A) In general.--The Secretary of State shall designate a senior advisor at the Department of State (in this section referred to as the ``Senior Advisor''), who shall oversee and coordinate the implementation of the AUKUS partnership.
		(B) Qualification.--The Senior Advisor may be an individual serving within the existing leadership of the Department of State but that individual may not hold any other position concurrently while serving as the Senior Advisor.
		(C) Reporting.--The Senior Advisor shall report directly to the Secretary of State.
		(D) Guidance.--The Secretary of State shall issue guidance to all bureaus of the Department of State specifying the Senior Advisor's responsibility for coordinating the implementation of all AUKUS partnership-related activities.	(2) Duties.--The duties of the Senior Advisor shall be to--
		(A) coordinate efforts to implement the AUKUS partnership across relevant bureaus, directorates, and offices of the Department of State involved in matters such as arms exports, non-proliferation, deterrence, security assistance, and Indo-Pacific and United Kingdom relations;
		(B) serve as the lead within the Department of State on matters relating to the AUKUS partnership in the interagency process;
		(C) lead diplomatic efforts related to the AUKUS partnership with other governments to explain how the partnership will enhance security and stability in the Indo-Pacific region; and
		(D) consult regularly with the appropriate congressional committees and keep such committees fully and currently informed on all aspects of the AUKUS partnership, to include--
			(i) Australia's acquisition of conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarines;
			(ii) jointly developing advanced military capabilities; and
			(iii) any new programs under the AUKUS partnership.
	(3) Personnel to support the senior advisor.--The Secretary of State shall ensure that the Senior Advisor is adequately staffed with respect to the Senior Advisor's duties described in paragraph (2) through details, or assignment of employees of the Department of State, with expertise consistent with such duties.
(b) Task Force.--
	(1) Establishment.--The Secretary of State shall establish a task force, to be known as the Task Force on AUKUS (in this section referred to as the ``Task Force''), which--
		(A) shall meet regularly to coordinate internally on issues relating to the implementation of the AUKUS partnership; and
		(B) shall be led by the Senior Advisor.
	(2) Duties.--The duties of the Task Force may include--
		(A) ensuring that responsible offices maintain a unified list of all defense-related transactions that have taken place under the AUKUS partnership;
		(B) ensuring the establishment of a framework for gathering, maintaining, and exchanging information relating to companies, individuals, or entities that are compromising security of military technology, defense articles, and defense services exchanged under the AUKUS partnership; and
		(C) establishing an AUKUS industry forum for industry stakeholders, including non-traditional defense contractors (as such term is defined in section 3014 of title 10, United States Code), that will be open for the participation of foreign industry involved in the AUKUS partnership.
	(3) Personnel to support the task force.--The personnel assigned to support the Senior Advisor under subsection (a)(3) shall also support the Task Force. The Secretary of State may not assign any additional personnel to support the Task Force.
(c) Notification.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, or not later than 90 days after the date on which a senior advisor at the Department of State is designated as the Senior Advisor, whichever occurs earlier, the Secretary of State shall notify the appropriate congressional committees of the number of personnel, relevant expertise of such personnel, and duties of such personnel directly supporting the work of the Senior Advisor and the offices supporting the Task Force.
(d) Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit to the
appropriate congressional committees a report that includes the following:
	(1) A detailed description of the planned work of the Senior Advisor and the Task Force on matters related to the implementation of the AUKUS partnership.
	(2) For the preceding two calendar years and the current calendar year--
		(A) the average and median times for the United States Government to review applications for licenses to export defense articles or defense services to persons, corporations, and the governments (including agencies and subdivisions of such governments, including official missions of such governments) of Australia or the United Kingdom;
		(B) the average and median times for the United States Government to review applications from Australia and the United Kingdom for foreign military sales beginning from the date Australia or the United Kingdom submitted a letter of request that resulted in a letter of acceptance; and
		(C) the number of applications from Australia and the United Kingdom for licenses to export defense articles and defense services that were denied or approved with provisos, listed by year.
	(3) For each of the preceding two calendar years, the number of voluntary disclosures resulting in a violation of the International Traffic in Arms Regulations enumerated under section 40 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2780) or involving proscribed countries listed in section 126.1 of the International Traffic in Arms Regulations, by persons, corporations, and the governments (including agencies and subdivisions of such governments, including official missions of such governments) of Australia or the United Kingdom, including information with respect to--
		(A) any instance of unauthorized access to technical data or defense articles;
		(B) inadequate physical or cyber security;
		(C) retransfers or re-exports without authorization; and(D) employees of foreign companies that are United States persons that provide defense services without authorization.
(e) Annual Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Senior Advisor shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report that includes--
	(1) a detailed description of any issues that representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, or Australia have identified that threaten or conflict with the stated goals of the AUKUS partnership and any efforts to resolve these issues;
	(2) information on the National Disclosure Policy Committee with respect to adoption of a classification category relating to any anticipatory disclosure policy for Australia and the United Kingdom;
	(3) a detailed description of Department of State investigations into violations under section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778) or related provisions that involve AUKUS partners or entities in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia;
	(4) details on whether regulatory changes to exemptions authorized under subsection (l) of section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778), as added by section 1343 of this Act, are likely or necessary within the next year; and
	(5) an assessment of the change in the average and median Department of State licensing review times for the current reporting year based on the average and median licensing review times from the prior calendar year, including review times across the interagency for export licenses issued to Australia or the United Kingdom.
(f) Sunset.--
	(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the position of the Senior Advisor and the Task Force shall terminate on the date that is 7 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
	(2) Renewal.--The Secretary of State may renew the position of the Senior Advisor and the Task Force for 1 additional period of 4 years beginning after the date on which the Secretary notifies the appropriate congressional committees of the renewal.

(g) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
	(1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives; and
	(2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and Committee on Appropriations of the Senate.
SEC. 1332. DESIGNATION OF SENIOR OFFICIAL FOR DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ACTIVITIES RELATING TO, AND IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR, THE AUKUS PARTNERSHIP.

(a) Designation of Senior Official.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall designate a senior civilian official of the Department of Defense who shall be responsible for overseeing Department of Defense activities relating to the AUKUS partnership.
(b) Plan.--
	(1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Administrator for Nuclear Security and the Secretary of State, shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report containing an implementation plan outlining Department of Defense efforts relating to the AUKUS partnership.
	(2) Elements.--The plan required by paragraph (1) shall include the following:
		(A) Timelines and major anticipated milestones for the implementation of the AUKUS partnership.
		(B) An identification of dependencies of such milestones on defense requirements that are--
			(i) unrelated to the AUKUS partnership; and
			(ii) solely within the decisionmaking responsibility of Australia or the United Kingdom.
		(C) A consideration of the implications of the plan on the industrial base with respect to--
(i) the expansion of existing United States submarine construction capacity to fulfill United States, United Kingdom, and Australia requirements;
(ii) acceleration of the restoration of United States capabilities for producing highly enriched uranium to fuel submarine reactors;
(iii) stabilization of commodity markets and expanding supplies of high-grade steel, construction materials, and other resources required for improving shipyard condition and expanding throughput capacity; and
(iv) coordination and synchronization of industrial sourcing opportunities among Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
		(D) A description of resourcing and personnel requirements, including--
			(i) a detailed assessment of the feasibility of hiring and retaining additional foreign disclosure officers to facilitate more rapid technology transfer to Australia and the United Kingdom; and
			(ii) an assessment of any additional requirements for Department of Defense personnel to support the transfer of defense articles to Australia and the United Kingdom.
		(E) A plan for improving information sharing, including--
			(i) recommendations for modifications to foreign disclosure policies and processes;
			(ii) the promulgation of written information-sharing guidelines or policies to improve information sharing under the AUKUS partnership;
			(iii) the establishment of an information handling caveat specific to the AUKUS partnership; and(iv) the reduction in use of the Not Releasable to Foreign Nations (NOFORN) information handling caveat.
		(F) Processes for the protection of privately held intellectual property, including patents.
		(G) Recommended updates to other title 10, United States Code, authorities or regulatory, policy, or process frameworks.
(c) Semiannual Updates.--Not later than 60 days after the date on which the plan required by subsection (b) is submitted, and semiannually thereafter not later than April 1 and October 1 each year through 2029, the senior civilian official designated under subsection (a) shall provide the congressional defense committees and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate with a briefing on the status of all Department activities to implement the AUKUS partnership.
SEC. 1333. REPORTING RELATED TO THE AUKUS PARTNERSHIP.

(a) Report on Instruments.--
	(1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the signature, conclusion, or other finalization of any non-binding instrument related to the AUKUS partnership, the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees the text of such instrument.
	(2) Non-duplication of efforts; rule of construction.--To the extent the text of a non-binding instrument is submitted to the appropriate congressional committees pursuant to paragraph (1), such text does not need to be submitted to Congress pursuant to section 112b(a)(1)(A)(ii) of title 1, United States Code, as amended by section 5947 of the James M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023 (Public Law 117-
263; 136 Stat. 3476). Paragraph (1) shall not be construed to relieve the executive branch of any other requirement of section 112b of title 1, United States Code, as so amended, or any other provision of law.
	(3) Definitions.--In this subsection:
		(A) In general.--The term ``text'', with respect to a non-binding instrument, includes--
			(i) any annex, appendix, codicil, side agreement, side letter, or any document of similar purpose or function to the aforementioned, regardless of the title of the document, that is entered into contemporaneously and in conjunction with the non-binding instrument; and
			(ii) any implementing agreement or arrangement, or any document of similar purpose or function to the aforementioned, regardless of the title of the document, that is entered into contemporaneously and in conjunction with the non-
binding instrument.
		(B) Contemporaneously and in conjunction with.--As used in subparagraph (A), the term ``contemporaneously and in conjunction with''--
			(i) shall be construed liberally; and
			(ii) may not be interpreted to require any action to have occurred simultaneously or on the same day.
(b) Report on AUKUS Partnership.--
	(1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and biennially thereafter, the Secretary of State, in coordination with the Secretary of Defense and other appropriate heads of agencies, shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on the AUKUS partnership.
	(2) Elements.--Each report required under paragraph (1) shall include the following elements:
		(A) Strategy.--
			(i) An identification of the defensive military capability gaps and capacity shortfalls that the AUKUS partnership seeks to offset.
			(ii) An explanation of the total cost to the United States associated with Pillar One of the AUKUS partnership.
			(iii) A detailed explanation of how enhanced access to the industrial base of Australia is contributing to strengthening the United States strategic position in Asia.
			(iv) A detailed explanation of the military and strategic benefit provided by the improved access provided by naval bases of Australia.
(v) A detailed assessment of how Australia's sovereign conventionally armed nuclear attack submarines contribute to United States defense and deterrence objectives in the Indo-Pacific region.		(B) Implement the aukus partnership.--
			(i) Progress made on achieving the Optimal Pathway established for Australia's development of conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarines, including the following elements:
		(I) A description of progress made by Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States to conclude an Article 14 arrangement with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
		(II) A description of the status of efforts of Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States to build the supporting infrastructure to base conventionally armed, nuclear-powered attack submarines.
		(III) Updates on the efforts by Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States to train a workforce that can build, sustain, and operate conventionally armed, nuclear-
powered attack submarines.
		(IV) A description of progress in establishing submarine support facilities capable of hosting rotational forces in western Australia by 2027.
		(V) A description of progress made in improving United States submarine production capabilities that will enable the United States to meet--
(aa) its objectives of providing up to five Virginia Class submarines to Australia by the early to mid-2030's; and
(bb) United States submarine production requirements.(ii) Progress made on Pillar Two of the AUKUS partnership, including the following elements:
		(I) An assessment of the efforts of Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States to enhance collaboration across the following eight trilateral lines of effort:
(aa) Underseas capabilities.
(bb) Quantum technologies.
(cc) Artificial intelligence and autonomy.
(dd) Advanced cyber capabilities.
(ee) Hypersonic and counter-
hypersonic capabilities.
(ff) Electronic warfare.
(gg) Innovation.
(hh) Information sharing.
		(II) An assessment of any new lines of effort established.
PART 2--STREAMLINING AND PROTECTING TRANSFERS OF UNITED STATES MILITARY TECHNOLOGY FROM COMPROMISE

SEC. 1341. PRIORITY FOR AUSTRALIA AND THE UNITED KINGDOM IN FOREIGN MILITARY SALES AND DIRECT COMMERCIAL SALES.

(a) In General.--The President shall institute policies and procedures for letters of request from Australia and the United Kingdom to transfer defense articles and services under section 21 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2761) related to AUKUS to receive expedited consideration and processing relative to all other letters of request other than from Taiwan and Ukraine.
(b) Technology Transfer Policy for Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom.--
	(1) In general.--The Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of Defense, shall create an anticipatory release policy for the transfer of technologies described in paragraph (2) to Australia, the United Kingdom, and Canada through Foreign Military Sales and Direct Commercial Sales that are not covered by an exemption under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations.
	(2) Capabilities described.--The capabilities described in this paragraph are--
		(A) Pillar One-related technologies associated with submarine and associated combat systems; and
		(B) Pillar Two-related technologies, including hypersonic missiles, cyber capabilities, artificial intelligence, quantum technologies, undersea capabilities, and other advanced technologies.
	(3) Expedited decision-making.--Review of a transfer under the policy established under paragraph (1) shall be subject to an expedited decision-making process.
(c) Interagency Policy and Guidance.--The Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense shall jointly review and update interagency policies and implementation guidance related to requests for Foreign Military Sales and Direct Commercial Sales, including by incorporating the anticipatory release provisions of this section.
SEC. 1342. IDENTIFICATION AND PRE-CLEARANCE OF PLATFORMS, TECHNOLOGIES, AND EQUIPMENT FOR SALE TO AUSTRALIA AND THE UNITED KINGDOM THROUGH FOREIGN MILITARY SALES AND DIRECT COMMERCIAL SALES.

(a) In General.--
Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and on a biennial basis thereafter for 8 years, the President shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a report that includes a list of advanced military platforms, technologies, and equipment that are pre-cleared and prioritized for sale and release to Australia, the United Kingdom and Canada through the Foreign Military Sales and Direct Commercial Sales programs without regard to whether a letter of request or license to purchase such platforms, technologies, or equipment has been received from any of such country.
(b) Additional Items.--Each list may include items that are not related to the AUKUS partnership but may not include items that are not covered by an exemption under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations except unmanned aerial or hypersonic systems.
SEC. 1343. EXPORT CONTROL EXEMPTIONS AND STANDARDS.

(a) In General.--Section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``(l) AUKUS Defense Trade Cooperation.--
``(1) Determination and certification.--
``(A) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this subsection, the President shall determine and certify in writing, and include a detailed justification, to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives whether Australia or the United Kingdom has--
``(i) implemented a system of export controls comparable to those of the United States that satisfies the elements of subsection (j)(2)(A)(i), (ii), (iii), and (iv) and subsection (j)(2)(B)(i), (ii) and (v) for United States-origin defense articles and defense services, and for controlling the provision of military training; and
``(ii) implemented a comparable exemption from its export controls for the United States.
``(B) Matters to be included.--
``(i) Requirements met.--If the President makes the determination that Australia or the United Kingdom meets the comparability standards of clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (A), the justification required by such subparagraph shall include an assessment of how the country satisfied the specific elements described in such clauses.
``(ii) Requirements not met.--If the President makes a determination that Australia or the United Kingdom does not meet the comparability standards of clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (A), the justification required by such subparagraph shall include, as applicable--
``(I) the specific elements of either such clause (i) or (ii) that were determined not to meet the comparability standards;
``(II) the specific actions the country needs to take in order to meet the comparability standards; and
``(III) the actions the United States is taking, as appropriate, to facilitate that the country is granted an exemption in a timely manner upon meeting the comparability standards.
``(C) Form.--The determination and certification described in subparagraph (A) shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.``(2) Exemption.--Upon submittal of a determination and certification to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives that Australia or the United Kingdom has met the comparability standards of clauses (i) and (ii) of paragraph (1)(A), and subject to the limitation in paragraph (4), the President shall immediately exempt from the licensing or other approval requirements of this section exports and transfers (including reexports, transfers, temporary imports, and brokering activities) of defense articles and defense services between the United States and that country or among the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia.
``(3) Reassessment.--
``(A) In general.--If the President is unable to make a determination that Australia or the United Kingdom has met the comparability standards of clauses (i) and (ii) of paragraph (1)(A) or suspends the exemption pursuant to paragraph (5), the President shall--
``(i) not less frequently than once every 120 days reassess whether the country has met those requirements;
``(ii) report the results of such reassessment in writing, and include a detailed justification, to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives; and
``(iii) report on steps the country must take to establish the exemption.
``(B) Positive reassessment.--Upon any reassessment under subparagraph (A) in which the President determines that Australia or the United Kingdom has met the comparability standards of clauses (i) and (ii) of paragraph (1)(A), the President shall immediately provide to that country an exemption described in paragraph (2).
``(C) Negative reassessment.--If the President finds in any reassessment under subparagraph (A) that Australia or the United Kingdom has not met the comparability standards of clauses (i) and (ii) of paragraph (1)(A), the written reassessment shall include, as applicable--
``(i) the specific elements of either such clauses that were determined not to be comparable;
``(ii) the specific actions the country needs to take in order to meet the comparability standards; and
``(iii) the actions the United States is taking, as appropriate, to facilitate that the country is granted an exemption in a timely manner upon meeting the comparability standards.
``(D) Form.--The reassessment described in subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be submitted in an unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.``(4) Limitation.--An exemption described in paragraph (2) shall not apply to any activity (including exports, transfers, reexports, retransfers, temporary imports, or brokering) of defense articles and defense services between or among the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia that--
``(A) are excluded by those countries;
(B) are referred to in subsection (j)(1)(C)(ii); or(C) involve individuals or entities that are not approved by--
``(i) the Secretary of State; and
``(ii) the Ministry of Defense, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or other similar authority within those countries.
``(5) Temporary suspension of exemption.--
``(A) In general.--The President may suspend an exemption described in paragraph (2) with respect to Australia or the United Kingdom if the President determines and certifies in writing, and includes a detailed justification, to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives that--
``(i) the country has ceased to implement a system of export controls comparable to those of the United States that satisfies the elements of subsection (j)(2)(A)(i), (ii), (iii), and (iv) and subsection (j)(2)(B)(i), (ii) and (v) for United States-origin defense articles and defense services, and for controlling the provision of military training; and
(ii) due to a substantial change in circumstance, the suspension is necessary to protect the vital national security or foreign policy interests of the United States in relation to the country concerned; or(iii) the country concerned has ceased to implement a comparable exemption from its export controls for the United States.``(B) Additional matter to be included.--The justification required to be included in the determination and certification described in subparagraph (A) shall also include a description of the specific actions the United States and the country are taking to address the reasons for the suspension.
``(C) Form.--The determination and certification described in subparagraph (A) shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.
``(D) Report.--If the President reissues an exemption described in paragraph (2) with respect to Australia or the United Kingdom that the President suspended pursuant to subparagraph (A), the President shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a report stating the steps the country took that allowed the exemption to be so reinstated.
``(6) Certain requirements not applicable.--
``(A) In general.--Paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of section 3(d) shall not apply to any export or transfer that is the subject of an exemption described in paragraph (2).
``(B) Quarterly reports.--The Secretary of State shall--
``(i) require all exports and transfers that would be subject to the requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of section 3(d) but for the application of subparagraph (A) to be reported to the Secretary; and
``(ii) submit such reports to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives on a quarterly basis.
``(7) Sunset.--
``(A) In general.--Any exemption described in paragraph (2) shall terminate on the date that is 15 years after the date of the enactment of this subsection.
``(B) Renewal.--The Secretary of State may renew such exemption for 5 years upon a certification to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives that such exemption is in the vital national interest of the United States with a detailed justification for such certification.''.''.
(b) Reports.--
	(1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter until no exemptions described in subsection (l)(2) of section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778), as added by subsection (a) of this section, remain in effect, the Secretary of State shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a report on the operation of exemptions described in such subsection (l)(2), including whether any changes to such exemptions are likely to be made in the coming year.
	(2) Initial report.--The first report submitted under paragraph (1) shall also include an assessment of key recommendations the United States Government has provided to the Governments of Australia and the United Kingdom to revise laws, regulations, and policies of such countries that are required to implement the AUKUS partnership.
	(3) Report on expedited review of export licenses for exports of advanced technologies.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in coordination with the Secretary of Defense, shall report on the practical application of a possible ``fast track'' decision-
making process for applications, classified or unclassified, to export defense articles and defense services to Australia, the United Kingdom, and Canada.
SEC. 1344. EXPEDITED REVIEW OF EXPORT LICENSES FOR EXPORTS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES TO AUSTRALIA, THE UNITED KINGDOM, AND CANADA.

(a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in coordination with the Secretary of Defense, shall initiate a rulemaking to establish an expedited decision-making process, classified or unclassified, for applications to export to Australia, the United Kingdom, and Canada commercial, advanced-technology defense articles and defense services that are not covered by an exemption under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations.
(b) Eligibility.--To qualify for the expedited decision-making process described in subsection (a), an application shall be for an export of defense articles or defense services that will take place wholly within or between the physical territory of Australia, Canada, or the United Kingdom and the United States and with governments or corporate entities from such countries.
(c) Availability of Expedited Process.--The expedited decision-making process described in subsection (a) shall be available
for both classified and unclassified items, and the process must satisfy the following criteria to the extent practicable:
	(1) Any licensing application to export defense articles and services that is related to a government to government agreement must be approved, returned, or denied within 30 days of submission.
	(2) For all other licensing requests, any review shall be completed not later than 45 calendar days after the date of application.
SEC. 1345. UNITED STATES MUNITIONS LIST.

(a) Exemption for the Governments of the United Kingdom and Australia From Certification and Congressional Notification Requirements Applicable to Certain Transfers.--Section 38(f)(3) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778(f)(3)) is amended by inserting , the United Kingdom, or Australia'' after Canada''.
(b) United States Munitions List Periodic Reviews.--
	(1) In general.--The Secretary of State, acting through authority delegated by the President to carry out periodic reviews of items on the United States Munitions List under section 38(f) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778(f)) and in coordination with the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall carry out such reviews not less frequently than every 3 years.
	(2) Scope.--The periodic reviews described in paragraph (1) shall focus on matters including--
		(A) interagency resources to address current threats faced by the United States;
		(B) the evolving technological and economic landscape;
		(C) the widespread availability of certain technologies and items on the United States Munitions List; and
		(D) risks of misuse of United States-origin defense articles.
	(3) Consultation.--The Department of State may consult with the Defense Trade Advisory Group (DTAG) and other interested parties in conducting the periodic review described in paragraph (1).
PART 3 SHORT TITLE.

This part may be cited as the ``AUKUS Submarine Transfer Authorization Act''.
SEC. 1352. AUTHORIZATION OF SALES OF VIRGINIA CLASS SUBMARINES TO AUSTRALIA.

(a) In General.--Effective beginning on the date that is one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President is authorized to transfer up to two Virginia Class submarines from the inventory of the Department of the Navy to the Government of Australia on a sale basis, and transfer not more than one additional Virginia Class submarine to the Government of Australia on a sale basis pursuant to section 21 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2761) during the 20-year period
beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, to implement the trilateral security partnership between Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States (in this section referred to as the ``AUKUS partnership'').

(b) Provisions of Law Superseded.--The transfer of a vessel authorized under subsection (a) shall not be subject to the requirements of--
	(1) section 36 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2776); or(2) section 8677 of title 10, United States Code.
(c) Costs of Transfers.--Any expense incurred by the United States in connection with a transfer of a vessel authorized under subsection (a) shall be charged to the Government of Australia notwithstanding section 516(e) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2321j(e)).
(d) Certifications and Other Requirements.--
	(1) In general.--Not later than 270 days prior to the transfer of a vessel authorized under subsection (a), the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees and leadership a certification that--
		(A) the transfer of such vessels--
			(i) will not degrade the United States undersea capabilities;
			(ii) is consistent with United States foreign policy and national security interests; and
			(iii) is in furtherance of the AUKUS partnership;
		(B) the United States is making sufficient submarine production and maintenance investments to meet the combination of United States military requirements and the requirements under subparagraph (A);
		(C) the Government of Australia has provided the appropriate funds and support for the additional capacity required to meet the requirements identified in this section; and
		(D) the Government Australia has the capability to host and fully operate the vessels authorized to be transferred.
	(2) Waiver of chief of naval operations certification.--The requirement for the Chief of Naval Operations to make a certification under section 8678 of title 10, United States Code, shall not apply to the transfer of a vessel authorized under subsection (a).	(3) Required mutual defense agreement.--
		(A) In general.--The President may not provide for the transfer of a vessel authorized under subsection (a) unless the United States and Australia have entered into a mutual defense agreement that meets the requirements of subparagraph (B) and such agreement is in effect.
		(B) Requirements.--A mutual defense agreement meets the requirements described in this subparagraph if the agreement--
			(i) provides a clear legal framework for the sole purpose of Australia's acquisition of conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarines; and(ii) meets the highest nonproliferation standards for the exchange of nuclear materials, technology,
equipment, and information between the United States and Australia.
	(4) Subsequent sales.--A transfer of vessel that is a Virginia class submarine on a sale basis other than a transfer described in subsection (a) may occur only if such transfer is explicitly authorized pursuant to a law enacted after the date of the enactment of this Act.
(e) Crediting of Receipts.--
	(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any provision of law pertaining to the crediting of amounts received from a sale under the terms of section 21 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2761), any receipt of the United States as a result of a transfer of a vessel authorized under subsection (a) shall--
		(A) be credited, at the discretion of the President to--
			(i) the appropriation, fund, or account used in incurring the original obligation;
			(ii) an appropriate appropriation, fund, or account currently available for the purposes for which the expenditures for the original acquisition of submarines transferred under this section were made; or(iii) any other appropriation, fund, or account available for the improvement of the United States submarine industrial base; and
		(B) remain available for obligation until expended for the same purpose as the appropriation to which the receipt is credited.	(2) Notifications and report.--
		(A) Initial notification.--Not later than 30 days before the date of the delivery of the first vessel authorized to be transferred under subsection (a), the President shall notify the appropriate congressional committees and leadership of the following:
			(i) The Government of Australia has achieved Submarine Rotational Forces-West full operational capability to support 4 rotationally deployed Virginia class submarines and one Astute class submarine, including having demonstrated the domestic capacity to fully perform all the associated activities necessary for the safe hosting and operation of nuclear-powered submarines.
			(ii) The Government of Australia has achieved sovereign-ready initial operational capability to support a Royal Australian Navy Virginia class submarine, including having demonstrated the domestic capacity to fully perform all the associated--
		(I) activities necessary for the safe hosting and operation of nuclear-
powered submarines;
		(II) crewing;
		(III) operations;
		(IV) regulatory and emergency procedures, including those specific to nuclear power plants; and
		(V) detailed planning for enduring Virginia class submarine ownership, including each significant event leading up to and including nuclear defueling.
		(B) Notification.--Not later than 30 days after the date of a transfer of any vessel authorized under subsection (a), and upon any transfer or depositing of funds received pursuant to such a transfer, the President shall notify the appropriate congressional committees and leadership of--
			(i) the amount of funds received pursuant to the transfer; and
			(ii) the specific account or fund into which the funds described in clause (i) are deposited.
		(C) Report.--Not later than 30 days after the receipt of funds as described in subparagraph (B), the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees and leadership a report on the matters described in clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (A).
(f) Applicability of Existing Law to Transfer of Special Nuclear Material and Utilization Facilities for Military Applications.--
	(1) In general.--With respect to any special nuclear material for use in utilization facilities or any portion of a vessel transferred under the authority of subsection (a) constituting utilization facilities for military applications under section 91 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2121), the transfer of such material or such facilities shall only occur in accordance with such section 91.
	(2) Use of funds.--The President may use proceeds from a transfer described in subparagraph (1) for the acquisition of submarine naval nuclear propulsion plants and the nuclear fuel to replace the propulsion plants and fuel transferred to the Government of Australia.
(g) Repair and Refurbishment of AUKUS Submarines.--Section 8680 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
	(1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); and
	(2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection:

``(c) Repair and Refurbishment of Certain Submarines.--
	(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, and subject to paragraph (2), the President shall determine the appropriate public or private shipyard in the United States, Australia, or the United Kingdom to perform any repair or refurbishment of a United States submarine involved in submarine security activities between the United States, Australia, and the United Kingdom.

``(2)(A) The President may determine under paragraph (1) that repair or refurbishment described in such paragraph may be performed in Australia or the United Kingdom only if--
``(i) such repair or refurbishment will facilitate the development of repair or refurbishment capabilities in the United Kingdom or Australia;
(ii) such repair or refurbishment will be for a United States submarine that is operating forward outside of the United States; or(iii) the Secretary of Defense certifies to Congress that performing such repair or refurbishment at a shipyard in Australia or the United Kingdom is required due to an exigent threat to the national security interests of the United States.
``(B) In making a determination under subparagraph (A), the President shall consider any effects of such determination on the capacity and capability of shipyards in the United States.
``(C) Not later than 15 days after the date on which the Secretary of Defense makes a certification under subparagraph (A)(iii), the Secretary shall brief the congressional defense committees on--
``(i) the threat that requires the use of a shipyard in Australia or the United Kingdom; and
``(ii) opportunities to mitigate the future potential need to leverage foreign shipyards.

``(3) Repair or refurbishment described in paragraph (1) may be carried out by personnel and contractors of the United States, the United Kingdom, or Australia in accordance with the international arrangements governing the submarine security activities described in such paragraph.''.
(h) Transfer or Export of Defense Services.--
	(1) In general.--The President may transfer or authorize the export of defense services (as such term is defined in section 47 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2794)) to the Government of Australia and the Government of the United Kingdom necessary or incidental to support the transfer and operation of vessels authorized under subsection (a).
	(2) Authority to export to australian and united kingdom private and public-sector personnel.--The transfer or export of defense services under this subsection may be directly exported to private and public-sector personnel of Australia or to private and public-sector personnel of the United Kingdom to support the development of the Australian submarine industrial base necessary for submarine security activities between members of the AUKUS partnership, including in the case in which such private and public-sector personnel are not officers, employees, or agents of the Government of Australia or the Government of the United Kingdom.
	(3) Application of requirements for retransfer and reexport.--Any person who receives any defense service transferred or exported under paragraph (1) may retransfer or reexport such service to other persons only in accordance with the requirements of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2751 et seq.).
	(4) Security controls.--
		(A) In general.--Any defense service transferred or exported under paragraph (1) shall be subject to appropriate security controls to ensure that any sensitive information conveyed by such transfer or export is protected from disclosure to persons unauthorized by the United States to receive such information.
		(B) Certification.--Not later than 30 days before the first transfer or export of a defense service under paragraph (1), and annually thereafter, the President shall certify to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives that the controls described in subparagraph (A) will protect the information described in such subparagraph for the defense services so transferred or exported.
(i) Report.--
	(1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act and annually thereafter for 15
years, the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees and leadership a report describing--
		(A) the status of the transfer of vessels authorized under subsection (a);
		(B) the implementation of submarine security cooperation under the AUKUS partnership and challenges towards its implementation;
		(C) expansion of the public and private Virginia class submarine production and repair facilities, to include proposed work conducted in Australia and the United Kingdom to meet the additional work required by commitments under the AUKUS partnership;
		(D) an annual procurement schedule for the total quantity of submarines the Department of Defense plans to procure over the 15 years following the date of the enactment of this Act; and
		(E) a list of transfers or exports of defense services authorized under subsection (h) and the private-sector personnel of Australia or the private-sector personnel of the United Kingdom to whom the defense services were exported.
	(2) Form.--The report required by this subsection shall be submitted in classified form.
SEC. 1353. ACCEPTANCE OF CONTRIBUTIONS IN SUPPORT OF AUSTRALIA, UNITED KINGDOM, AND UNITED STATES SUBMARINE SECURITY ACTIVITIES.

(a) Acceptance Authority.--The President may accept from the Government of Australia contributions of money made by the Government of Australia for use by the Department of Defense in support of non-nuclear related aspects of submarine security activities between Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States (in this section referred to as the `AUKUS partnership').
(b) Establishment of Submarine Security Activities Account.--
	(1) In general.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a special account to be known as the ``Submarine Security Activities Account''.
	(2) Credit to account.--Contributions of money accepted by the President under subsection (a) shall be credited to the Submarine Security Activities Account.
	(3) Availability.--Amounts credited to the Submarine Security Activities Account shall remain available until expended.
(c) Use of Funds.--
	(1) In general.--Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (b), the President may use funds in the Submarine Security Activities Account--
		(A) for any purpose authorized by law that the President determines would support the AUKUS submarine security activities;
		(B) to carry out a military construction project that is consistent with the purposes for which the contributions were made and is authorized by law;
		(C) to develop and increase the submarine industrial base workforce by investing in recruiting, training, and
retaining key specialized labor at public and private shipyards; or(D) to upgrade facilities, equipment, and infrastructure needed to repair and maintain submarines at public and private shipyards.
	(2) No further specific authorization in law required.--
Funds in the Submarine Security Activities Account may be used as described in this subsection without further specific authorization in law.

(d) Plan for Use of Funds.--Not later than 30 days prior to any use of any funds in the Submarine Security Activities Account, the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees and leadership a plan detailing--
	(1) the amount of funds in the Submarine Security Activities Account; and
	(2) how such funds will be used, including specific amounts and purposes.
(e) Transfers of Funds.--
	(1) To department of defense.--
		(A) In general.--In carrying out subsection (c), the President may transfer funds available in the Submarine Security Activities Account to appropriations available to the Department of Defense.
		(B) Authority in addition to other transfer authority.--The authority provided in this paragraph is in addition to any other transfer authority otherwise provided by law and is subject to the same terms and conditions as the authority provided in section 8005 of the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2023 (Public Law 117-328), except for monetary limitations concerning the amount of authority available.
		(C) Availability.--Funds transferred under the authority provided in this paragraph shall be merged with and available for the same purposes, and for the same time period, as the appropriation to which transferred.
		(D) Limitation on certain transactions.--Contributions referred to in subsection (a) may not be obligated for a transaction authorized in subsection (c)(1)(B) until the President submits to the appropriate congressional committees and leadership notice of the transaction, including a detailed cost estimate, and a period of 21 days has elapsed after the date on which the notification is received by the appropriate congressional committees and leadership or, if earlier, a period of 14 days has elapsed after the date on which a copy of the notification is provided in an electronic medium.
	(2) To department of energy.--In carrying out subsection (c), and in accordance with the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), the President may transfer funds available in the Submarine Security Activities Account to appropriations or funds of the Department of Energy available to carry out activities related to AUKUS submarine security activities.
	(3) Transfers back to submarine security activities account. --Upon a determination by the President that all or part of the funds transferred from the Submarine Security Activities Account under this subsection are not necessary for
the purposes for which such funds were transferred, all or such part of such funds shall be transferred back to the Submarine Security Activities Account.
(f) Investment of Money.--
	(1) In general.--The President may invest money in the Submarine Security Activities Account in securities of the United States or in securities guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States.
	(2) Interest.--Any interest or other income that accrues from investment in securities referred to in paragraph (1) shall be deposited to the credit of the Submarine Security Activities Account.

(g) Relationship to Other Laws.--The authority to accept or transfer funds under this section is in addition to any other statutory authority to accept or transfer funds.(h) Notification and Report.--
	(1) Notification.--Not later than 60 days prior to the transfer of any funds from the Submarine Security Activities Account, the President shall notify the appropriate congressional committees and leadership of--
		(A) the intended use of such funds by appropriation, program, project, and activity, as defined in the Joint Explanatory Statement accompanying the Department of Defense Appropriations Act 2023 (Public Law 117-328); and(B) the extent to which such funds complement, supplement, or supplant other on-going or planned efforts funded by an appropriations Act with an identification of the associated funding and explanation of the combined efforts including the intended outcomes.
	(2) Annual report.--Not later than November 30 of each year until one year after the date on which all funds transferred under this section have been fully expended, the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees and leadership a report that includes a detailed accounting of--
		(A) the amount of funds transferred under this subsection during the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in which the report is submitted; and
		(B) the purposes for which such funds were used.
(i) Report.--
	(1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which contributions of money accepted by the President under subsection (a) are credited to the Submarine Security Activities Account under subsection (b), the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees and leadership a report on--
		(A) the amount of money so transferred;
		(B) a description of the intended use of the funds; and(C) any other matters related to the administration of the Submarine Security Activities Account as determined necessary by the Secretary.
	(2) Form.--The report required by this subsection shall be submitted in unclassified form but may include a classified annex.
SEC. 1354. APPROPRIATE CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES AND LEADERSHIP DEFINED.

In this subtitle, the term ``appropriate congressional committees and leadership'' means--
	(1) the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Armed Services, and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives; and
	(2) the majority leader of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on Armed Services, and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate.