PROPOSAL FOR A COUNCIL RESOLUTION establishing a study commission to: (1) review the City and County’s (City) current use of artificial intelligence (AI) and its associated technologies, (2) gather information from AI experts, industry leaders, and community members as to how AI can be used in the future to provide better services to the citizens of the Consolidated City, (3) recommend to the Mayor and elected county officials policies for trustworthy and transparent usage AI as a part of the provision of services by departments and agencies, (5) recommend to the City-County Council the modification of any existing ordinances or the provision of new ordinances establishing trustworthy and transparent usage AI. 


WHEREAS, the rapid advancement of artificial intelligence presents both opportunities and challenges for cities, including Indianapolis; and 


WHEREAS, Indianapolis recognizes the potential of artificial intelligence to enhance city services, foster economic growth, and improve the quality of life for its residents; and 


WHEREAS, the responsible development and deployment of AI technologies require informed policymaking, rooted in robust public discourse and expert insight; and 


WHEREAS, the Council acknowledges the need to stay ahead of these technological shifts by monitoring its implications, developing strategic proposals, and educating our constituents on AI's role in the future of the city; now, therefore: 


BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY-COUNTY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF INDIANAPOLIS AND OF MARION COUNTY, INDIANA: 


SECTION 1. Purpose: A study commission is hereby established under the authority of the council to review and analyze information gathered from AI experts, industry leaders, community members, and other stakeholders with the end goal being to recommend city policy changes. The commission shall hold public meetings and report its findings and recommendations to the full council. Public comment shall be allowed under any rules devised by the Commission.


SECTION 2. Name: The commission shall be named the “Commission on Artificial Intelligence Development (‘Commission’).” 


SECTION 3. Members: The Commission shall be composed of nine (9) members, as follows: three (3) Councillors, appointed by the Council President, one of whom shall be designated as the chair of the commission; one (1) Councillor appointed by the Council Minority Leader; one (1) Director of the City's Information Technology; three (3) citizen members referred by the Commission chair and appointed by the Council President; and one (1) citizen member, recommended by the minority leader and appointed by the Council President. All citizen members shall be residents of Marion County. 


SECTION 4. Quorum and Vacancies: After its initial meeting, the Commission shall meet upon the call of its chair or a majority of its members. Four (4) members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. Any findings or reports of the Commission shall only be approved by the vote of five (5) members. Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made. The Commission shall meet and begin its operations as soon as practical. 


SECTION 5. Staffing: The Commission will receive staff support from the Council Chief Administrative Officer, Clerk of the Council, the Legislative Officer for the Council and other Council staff as needed. All meetings shall be staffed, recorded, noticed and documented in the same manner as other City-County Council Committee meetings. 


SECTION 6. Information Sharing: City and County departments and agencies shall share information and cooperate with the Commission, including, without limitation, permitting personnel to meet with Commission members and testify before the Commission. 


SECTION 7. Timeline. The Commission shall meet within two weeks of the appointment of all members and thereafter shall meet upon a regular schedule established by the Commission. The Commission shall gather all needed research within 6 months of being fully constituted and shall have and review an initial draft of the below-described Report within the next 2 months. 


SECTION 8. Report: The Commission shall present its final report to the Council by the July 2024 meeting. The final report shall be posted on the City’s website. 


SECTION 9. This resolution shall be in full force and effect upon adoption and compliance with IC 36-3- 4-14.