NEW PROPOSED POLICY FOR COUNTY HANDBOOK 


Section 9.6. Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) Chatbot Usage Policy 


A. Purpose 


With the increasing popularity of generative AI chatbots such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT and Google’s Bard, it has become necessary to outline the proper use of such tools while working with the Employer. While we remain committed to adopting new technologies to aid our mission when possible, we also understand the risks and limitations of generative AI chatbots and want to ensure responsible use. Our goal is to protect employees, Executives, the public, and Kendall County from harm. 


B. Overview 


While AI chatbots can be used to perform a variety of functions, this policy addresses only the use of a web-based interface to ask or “prompt” the chatbot in a conversational manner to find answers to questions or to create or edit written content. Some examples of what could be created using an AI chatbot include:  
Emails and letters.  
Blog posts, reports and other publications.  
Sales and advertising copy.  
Policies and job descriptions.  
Spreadsheet calculations.  
Foreign language translations.  
Coding development or debugging.  
Document or information sorting.  
Outlines or summaries of internal or external information. 


There are, however, risks in using this technology, including uncertainty about who owns the AI-created content and security/privacy concerns with inputting proprietary information or sensitive information about an employee, elected official, a member of the public, etc., when interacting with the chatbot. Additionally, the accuracy of the content created by these technologies cannot be relied upon, as the information may be outdated, misleading or—in some cases—fabricated. 


C. Eligibility 


This policy applies to all employees and to all work associated with the Employer that those employees perform, whether on or off the Employer’s premises. 


D. Policy 


The use of generative AI chatbots will be allowed while performing work for the Employer, provided such use complies with this Policy and all other policies set forth in this Employee Handbook. Kendall County email addresses, credentials and phone numbers cannot be used to create an account with these technologies. No proprietary data and/or any other confidential data may be submitted (copied, typed, etc.) into these platforms. 


Employees wishing to use generative AI chatbots should discuss the parameters of their use with their applicable Executive. Executives may approve, deny, or modify those parameters as best meets the Employer’s policies, legal requirements, and other operational needs. 


All AI chatbot-generated content must be properly cited, as must the use of AI chatbotgenerated content when used as a resource for the employee’s work, except for general correspondence such as email. 


All AI-generated content must be reviewed for accuracy before relying on it for work purposes. If a reliable source cannot be found to verify factual information generated by the chatbot, that information cannot be used for work purposes. 


Any violation of this policy will result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 


E. Training 


All employees using AI chatbots for work purposes must be trained on the proper use of these technologies before using them. All questions related to this training should be addressed with the applicable Human Resources Representative and/or the Director of Kendall County’s Information, Communication and Technology Department. 


F. Ethical Use 


Employees must use generative AI chatbots in accordance with all the Employer’s conduct and antidiscrimination policies. These technologies must not be used to create content that is inappropriate, discriminatory, or otherwise harmful to others or to the Employer. Such use will result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 


G. Monitoring 


The Employer’s Technology and Record Retention Policies set forth in this Employee Handbook still apply when using generative AI chatbots with the Employer’s equipment.