WHEREAS, New Jersey has a long history of leading the next
frontiers of discovery and is a national leader for innovation and
the development of new technologies; and
WHEREAS, New Jersey endeavors to foster an environment for
continued investment, advancement, and economic potential for
New Jersey residents, companies, and public institutions; and
WHEREAS, New Jersey is a hub for commercial activity, business
formation, and research and development involving artificial
intelligence, including generative artificial intelligence
technologies, which generate new content – such as textual, visual,
spoken, or musical content – in response to user inputs of data;
and
WHEREAS, universities in New Jersey are institutional leaders
in research and development and discoveries in the studies of new
artificial intelligence technologies; and
WHEREAS, New Jersey is a trailblazer in the pharmaceutical,
biotechnology, and life sciences industries, among other sectors,
which have the opportunity to apply artificial intelligence
technologies to advance medical and scientific breakthroughs; and
WHEREAS, the use of artificial intelligence technologies is
advancing at an unprecedented pace and has the potential to be
transformative across public and private sectors; and
WHEREAS, New Jersey aspires to harness new artificial
intelligence technologies and realize their benefits to better
serve all New Jersey residents, encourage innovation and economic
growth, and promote social and economic equity; and
WHEREAS, as artificial intelligence technologies are
developed and evolve, they should be analyzed and monitored by
industry experts, consumer protection advocates, government
officials, and other stakeholders; and 
WHEREAS, the use of artificial intelligence technologies has
implications for state, national, and personal security, including
but not limited to cyber security and data security; and
WHEREAS, Executive Branch departments and agencies across
State government have been engaging, and will continue to engage,
with industry and other stakeholders to explore strategies to
promote the safe, responsible, and efficient development and use
of artificial intelligence technologies in New Jersey; and
WHEREAS, the exponential growth of artificial intelligence
technologies should be documented, and the potential risks of their
use should be acknowledged, planned for, and mitigated; and
WHEREAS, the State should promote the adoption of artificial
intelligence technologies in a manner that aligns and is consistent
with this State’s policies, goals, and values; and
WHEREAS, a stable and thoughtful regulatory approach to the
use of artificial intelligence technologies in this State will
continue to foster an environment for innovation while protecting
individual and civil rights; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to ensure that the use of artificial
intelligence technologies is fair, accessible, and beneficial to
this State’s residents;
NOW THEREFORE I, PHILIP D. MURPHY, Governor of the State of
New Jersey, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the
Constitution and by the Statutes of this State, do hereby ORDER
and DIRECT:
1. There is hereby established the Artificial Intelligence
Task Force (the “Task Force”), which shall be responsible for
studying emerging artificial intelligence technologies in order to
issue findings on the potential impacts of these technologies on
society and offer recommendations to identify government actions 
appropriate to encourage the ethical and responsible use of
artificial intelligence technologies.
2. The Task Force shall consist of: (i) the Chief Technology
Officer of the Office of Information Technology, who shall serve
as Co-Chair; (ii) the Chief Innovation Officer, who shall serve as
Co-Chair; (iii) the Chief Executive Officer of the Economic
Development Authority, who shall serve as Co-Chair; (iv) the
Director of the Office of Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and
Belonging; (v) the Commissioner of the Department of Education;
(vi) the Secretary of Higher Education; (vii) the Commissioner of
the Department of Labor and Workforce Development; (viii) the
Director of the New Jersey Office of Homeland Security and
Preparedness; and (ix) the Attorney General, or their designees.
3. The Governor may, as determined to be appropriate,
appoint additional members to the Task Force. All members of the
Task Force shall serve at the pleasure of the Governor and without
compensation.
4. The Task Force shall organize as soon as practicable
after the appointment of its members and shall convene at least as
often as requested by the Governor or Co-Chairs. The Co-Chairs
may designate working groups from among the members to assist them
in the Task Force’s performance of its duties.
5. The Co-Chairs shall issue a report with the Task Force’s
findings and recommendations to the Governor no later than 12
months after the effective date of this Order. The report shall
be made available to the Legislature and the public at the same
time.
6. The Task Force is authorized to call upon any department,
office, division, or agency of this State to supply it with data
or other information or assistance available to such agency as the 
Task Force deems necessary to execute its duties under this Order.
Each Executive Branch department and agency is hereby required, to
the extent not inconsistent with law, to cooperate fully with the
Task Force and to furnish such assistance on as timely a basis as
is necessary to accomplish the purpose of this Order. The Task
Force may consult with experts and other knowledgeable individuals
in the public or private sector on any aspect of its mission.
7. For purposes of this Order, “Executive Branch
departments and agencies” shall mean any of the principal
departments in the Executive Branch of State government and any
agency, authority, board, bureau, commission, division,
institution, office, or other instrumentality within or created by
any such department, and any independent State authority,
commission, instrumentality, or agency over which the Governor
exercises executive authority, as determined by the Attorney
General.
8. The Task Force may elicit public input from individuals,
including those associated with institutions of higher education,
organizations, community groups, and other interested parties. In
particular, the Task Force shall consult academic professionals
specializing in ethics or artificial intelligence technologies;
industry professionals; and professionals with backgrounds across
issues such as constitutional and legal rights, law enforcement,
education, and consumer protection to help inform and supplement
the Task Force’s findings.
9. The Task Force shall be purely advisory in nature and
shall provide advice to the Governor and other Executive Branch
departments and agencies as appropriate. 
Task Force deems necessary to execute its duties under this Order.
Each Executive Branch department and agency is hereby required, to
the extent not inconsistent with law, to cooperate fully with the
Task Force and to furnish such assistance on as timely a basis as
is necessary to accomplish the purpose of this Order. The Task
Force may consult with experts and other knowledgeable individuals
in the public or private sector on any aspect of its mission.
11. Nothing in this Order shall be construed to supersede
any federal, State, or local law.
12. This Order shall take effect immediately.