EXECUTIVE ORDER #211 
Relating to the Creation of the Governor’s Task Force on Workforce and Artificial Intelligence 


WHEREAS, Wisconsin is experiencing one of the strongest economic periods in state history, evidenced by the state’s record-low unemployment rate of 2.4 percent in May, and in July, record-high labor force participation and a Wisconsin record for total nonfarm jobs with 3,007,200; 


WHEREAS, artificial intelligence technology has the potential to reshape labor markets, and Wisconsin is well-positioned to ensure this transition is an opportunity for all Wisconsin workers, employers, and job seekers; 


WHEREAS, this administration continues to invest in education and technical training, developing Wisconsin’s workforce and tailoring programming to the needs of employers and prospective employees, and putting forward solutions to train and upskill Wisconsinites to fill family-sustaining jobs across the state; 


WHEREAS, artificial intelligence systems, the next generation of technology being produced, can learn from data without being explicitly programmed, create new content, and predict future outcomes; 


WHEREAS, artificial intelligence systems are increasingly being used in a range of industries important to Wisconsin, from manufacturing and healthcare to education, transportation, and agriculture, among other sectors key to Wisconsin’s future economic success; 


WHEREAS, due to the novelty of the technology that is being developed and implemented, Wisconsin must identify potential impacts of artificial intelligence across sectors, industries, occupations, and skillsets with an eye toward greater equity and economic opportunity; 


WHEREAS, Wisconsin is ready for solutions to ensure the state is prepared to take on the workforce challenges that may come with transformative technology like artificial intelligence systems and to embrace a future where all Wisconsinites will reap the benefits of an efficient, growing economy with the adoption of new technology; and 


WHEREAS, establishing this task force will serve as a crucial mechanism to understand, adapt, and capitalize on the transformations generative artificial intelligence will bring, ensuring Wisconsin’s workforce and industries remain vibrant through technological advancement. 


NOW THEREFORE, I, TONY EVERS, Governor of the State of Wisconsin, by the authority vested in me by the Constitution and laws of this State, including Section 14.019 of the Wisconsin Statutes, hereby create the Governor’s Task Force on Workforce and Artificial Intelligence (“Task Force”) and order the following: 


1. The Task Force shall be chaired by the Secretary of the Department of Workforce Development or a designee. The Governor shall appoint additional Task Force members as follows to serve at the pleasure of the Governor: 


a. The Secretary of the Department of Administration or a designee; 


b. The Secretary of the Wisconsin Economic Development Corporation or a designee; 


c. A representative from the University of Wisconsin System; 


d. A representative from the Wisconsin Technical College System; and 


e. Other individuals appointed by the Governor to serve at the pleasure of the Governor, who may include members from state and local government and individuals representing the business community, the education community, organized labor, the technology industry, and other leaders from impacted workforce sectors and industries. 


2. The Task Force shall gather and analyze information and produce an advisory action plan to the Governor. The action plan should do the following: 


a. Identify the current state of generative artificial intelligence’s impact on Wisconsin’s labor market and develop informed predictions regarding its impact for the near term and into the future; 


b. Identify how these workforce impacts may touch Wisconsin's key industries, occupations, and foundational skillsets; 


c. Explore initiatives to advance equity and economic opportunity in the face of these changes; and 


d. Based on the impacts identified, recommend solutions including policy related to workforce development and educational systems. 


3. The Commission shall be attached to the Department of Workforce Development.