AN ACT creating a temporary state commission to  study  and  investigate how  to regulate artificial intelligence, robotics and automation; and providing for the repeal of such provisions upon expiration thereof
 
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, REPRESENTED IN SENATE AND  ASSEMBLY, DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS:
 
Section  1.  A temporary state commission, to be known as the New York state artificial intelligence, robotics and automation commission (hereinafter "commission"), is hereby created  to  study  and  make  determinations on issues including but not limited to:
(a)  current law within this state addressing artificial intelligence, robotics and automation;
(b) comparative state policies that have aided in creating a regulatory structure for artificial intelligence, robotics and  automation,  and whether such measures would be similarly effective in this state;
(c) criminal and civil liability regarding violations of law caused by entities equipped with artificial intelligence, robotics and automation;
(d)  the impact of artificial intelligence, robotics and automation on employment in this state;
(e) the impact of artificial intelligence, robotics and automation  on the acquiring and disclosure of confidential information;
(f)  potential  restrictions  on  the  use of artificial intelligence, robotics and automation in weaponry;
(g) the potential impact on the technology industry of any  regulatory measures proposed by this study; and 
(h)  public  sector applications of artificial intelligence and cognitive technologies.


§  2. The commission shall consist of thirteen members to be appointed as follows: five shall be  appointed  by  the  governor;  two  shall  be appointed by the temporary president of the senate and one by the minority  leader  of the senate; two shall be appointed by the speaker of the assembly and one by the minority leader of the assembly;  one  shall  be appointed by the chancellor of the state university of New York; and one shall be appointed by the chancellor of the city university of New York.  The  members  of the commission shall serve at the pleasure of the official making the appointment of such member.  Vacancies in the membership of the commission shall be filled in the manner  provided  for  original appointments. Membership on the commission shall not constitute a public office.  A  chairperson  and vice-chairperson of the commission shall be elected by a majority of its members, all members being present.


§ 3. The members of the commission shall receive no  compensation  for their services, but shall be allowed their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties pursuant to this act.


§  4.  The  commission  may  conduct  any hearings or take any written testimony as it deems necessary, and shall take all other  steps  necessary  to  provide  a  thorough  analysis  of  all  issues related to the provisions listed in section one of this act.


§ 5. The commission shall issue a final report no  later  than  thirty days prior to the expiration of this act. The commission shall issue its report to the governor, the speaker of the assembly, the minority leader of the assembly, the temporary president of the senate, and the minority leader of the senate.


§  6.  This  act shall take effect immediately and shall expire and be deemed repealed December 31, 2020.