Part 3. Deep Technology Initiative


53B-26-301. Definitions.
As used in this part:
(1) "Advisory council" means the Deep Technology Talent Advisory Council created 53B-26-303.
(2) (a) "Deep technology" means technology that leads to new products and innovations based on scientific discovery or meaningful engineering innovation.
(b) "Deep technology" may include technology that leads to new products and innovations related to one or more of the following:
(i) advanced materials;
(ii) artificial intelligence;
(iii) augmented and virtual reality;
(iv) biotechnology;
(v) photonics;
(vi) quantum computing;
(vii) robotics;
(viii) secure computing; and
(ix) other emerging technologies as determined by the advisory council.
(3) "Institution of higher education" means the University of Utah, Utah State University, Southern Utah University, Weber State University, Snow College, Dixie State University, Utah Valley University, or Salt Lake Community College.


Section 2. Section 53B-26-302 is enacted to read:
53B-26-302. Deep technology initiative.
(1) Subject to appropriations from the Legislature and in accordance with the proposal process and other provisions of this section, the board shall develop and oversee a deep technology talent initiative that includes providing funding for expanded programs in deep technology.
(2) The board shall facilitate collaborations that create expanded, multidisciplinary programs or stackable credential programs in both undergraduate and graduate studies that prepare students to be workforce participants in jobs requiring deep technology skills.
(3) An institution of higher education seeking to partner with one or more participating employers shall submit a proposal to the board, in a form approved by the board and in accordance with deadlines determined by the board, which contains the following elements:
(a) a description of the proposed program in deep technology that demonstrates the program will:
(i) be responsive to the deep technology talent needs of the state through industry involvement in the project's design;
(ii) be a partnership that includes at least one participating employer and at least one institution of higher education; and
(iii) address a previously unmet state need related to deep technology;
(b) an estimate of:
(i) student enrollment in the program;
(ii) what academic credit or credentials will be provided by the program; and
(iii) occupations for which graduates will be qualified;
(c) evidence that each participating employer is committed to participating and contributing to the program by providing any combination of instruction, extensive workplace experience, or mentoring;
(d) a description of any resources that will be provided by each participating employer in the program; and
(e) the amount of funding requested for the program, including justification for the funding.
(4) The board shall provide all proposals to the advisory council and the advisory council shall review and prioritize each proposal received and recommend to the board whether the proposal should be funded, including the recommended amount of funding, using the following criteria:
(a) the quality and completeness of the elements of the proposal described in Subsection (3);
(b) to what extent the proposed program:
(i) would expand the capacity to meet state or regional workforce needs related to deep technology;
(ii) would integrate deep technology competency with disciplinary expertise;
(iii) identifies a faculty member or other individual who has expertise and a demonstrated willingness to lead the proposed program;
(iv) would incorporate internships or significant project experiences, including team-based experiences;
(v) identifies how industry professionals would participate in curriculum development and teaching;
(vi) would create partnerships with other higher education institutions and industry; and
(vii) would be cost effective; and
(c) other relevant criteria as determined by the advisory council and the board.
(5) Subject to Subsection (6) and the other provisions of this section, on or before September 1 of each fiscal year, the board shall review the recommendations of the advisory council and may provide funding for deep technology programs using the criteria described in Subsection (4).
(6) Before the board may provide funding for one or more deep technology programs for fiscal year 2021, on or before October 1, 2020, the board shall provide written information regarding the proposed funding to, and shall consider the recommendations of, the Higher Education Appropriations Subcommittee.
(7) (a) Each institution of higher education that receives funding under this section shall, in a form approved by the board, annually provide written information to the board regarding the activities, successes, and challenges related to administering the deep technology program, including:
(i) specific entities that received funding under this section;
(ii) the amount of funding provided to each entity;
(iii) the number of participating students in each program;
(iv) the number of graduates of the program; and
(v) the number of graduates of the program employed in jobs requiring deep technology skills.
(b) On or before November 1 of each year, the board shall provide a written report containing the information described in this Subsection (7) to the:
(i) Education Interim Committee; and
(ii) Higher Education Appropriations Subcommittee.


Section 3. Section 53B-26-303 is enacted to read:
53B-26-303. Deep Technology Talent Advisory Council.
(1) There is created the Deep Technology Talent Advisory Council to make recommendations to the board in the board's administration of the deep technology talen initiative described in Section 53B-26-302.
(2) The advisory council shall consist of the following members:
(a) two members who have extensive experience in deep technology in the private sector appointed by the president of the Senate;
(b) two members who have extensive experience in deep technology in the private sector appointed by the speaker of the House of Representatives;
(c) a representative of the board appointed by the chair of the board;
(d) a representative of the Governor's Office of Economic Development appointed by the executive director of the Governor's Office of Economic Development;
(e) one member of the Senate appointed by the president of the Senate;
(f) one member of the House of Representatives appointed by the speaker of the House of Representatives; and
(g) other specialized industry experts who may be invited by a majority of the advisory council to participate as needed as nonvoting members.
(3) The board shall provide staff support for the advisory council.
(4) (a) One of the advisory council members appointed under Subsection (2)(a) shall serve an initial term of two years and one of the advisory council members appointed under Subsection (2)(b) shall serve an initial term of two years.
(b) Except as described in Subsection (4)(a), all other advisory council members shall serve an initial term of four years.
(c) Successor advisory council members upon appointment or reappointment shall each serve a term of four years.
(d) When a vacancy occurs in the membership for any reason, the replacement shall be appointed by the initial appointing authority for the unexpired term.
(e) An advisory council member may not serve more than two consecutive terms.
(7) A vote of a majority of the advisory council members is necessary to take action on behalf of the advisory council.
(8) The duties of the advisory council include reviewing, prioritizing, and making recommendations to the board regarding proposals for funding under the deep technology talent initiative described in Section 53B-26-302.
(9) A member may not receive compensation or benefits for the member's service, but a member who is not a legislator may receive per diem and travel expenses in accordance with:
(a) Sections 63A-3-106 and 63A-3-107; and
(b) rules made by the Division of Finance pursuant to Sections 63A-3-106 and 63A-3-107.


Section 4. Appropriation.
The following sums of money are appropriated for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2020, and ending June 30, 2021. These are additions to amounts previously appropriated for fiscal year 2021. Under the terms and conditions of Title 63J, Chapter 1, Budgetary Procedures Act, the Legislature appropriates the following sums of money from the funds or accounts indicated for the use and support of the government of the state of Utah.


ITEM 1
To State Board of Regents -- Economic Development
From Workforce Development Restricted Account
$5,000,000


Schedule of Programs:
Deep Technology Talent Initiative     $5,000,000
The Legislature intends that appropriations under Item 1:
(1) be allocated to programs that meet the criteria described in Section 53B-26-302; and
(2) under Section 63J-1-603, not lapse at the close of fiscal year 2021.