SEC. 126. ACQUISITION, MODERNIZATION, AND SUSTAINMENT PLAN FOR CARRIER AIR WINGS.

(a) Plan Required.--Not later than April 1, 2022, the Secretary of the Navy shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 15-year acquisition, modernization, and sustainment plan for the carrier air wings of the Navy.

(b) Elements.--The plan required by subsection (a) shall include the following:
	(1)(A) An assessment of whether and to what extent the capabilities, capacity, and composition of the carrier air wings in existence as of the date of plan meet the requirements of the National Defense Strategy; and
		(B) a plan to address any known shortfalls of such carrier wings, including shortfalls with respect to aerial refueling aircraft capacity and strike-fighter combat radius.
	(2) An operational risk assessment and risk mitigation plan regarding the nine carrier air wings that, as of the date of the plan, support combatant commander steady-state peacetime and potential major contingency requirements.
	(3) An explanation of when the Secretary of the Navy will field a minimum of 10 carrier air wings in accordance with section 8062(e) of title 10, United States Code.
	(4) An identification and explanation of the role of autonomous and remotely-piloted aircraft, including the MQ-25 aircraft, and other potential capabilities and platforms planned to be fielded in future carrier air wings.
	(5) A detailed deck and hangar space plan that supports realistic peacetime steady-state or contingency surge level fixed-wing aircraft and rotorcraft preparation activities, flight operations, and onboard unit-level maintenance, repair, and sustainment activities for future carrier air wings.
	(6) An appropriate modernization plan to maximize operational use of platforms in existence as of the date of the plan, particularly the EA-18G aircraft and the E-2D aircraft, by leveraging available technologies such as Next Generation Jammer.
	(7) An identification of the logistics supply chain support and modernization plan required during peacetime steady-state and contingency operations for future carrier air wings, particularly as it relates to implementing the organic C-130 and C-40 logistics tethering strategy.
	(8) A detailed explanation for the Secretary of the Navy's decision to modify carrier air wing composition to one squadron of 14 F-35C aircraft instead of the originally planned two squadrons of 10 F-35C aircraft.