EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 629
KIMBERLEY DRJSCOLL
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR


ESTABLISHING AN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGIC TASK FORCE


WHEREAS, Massachusetts leads the nation in achieving prosperity through scientific
discovery and technological innovation;
WHEREAS, Artificial Intelligence ("AI") is a transformative technology that is likely to
impact many aspects of work across many sectors of the economy;
WHEREAS, Massachusetts can be a global leader in the effective and responsible use of
AI· ,
WHEREAS, the state must empower its people, business community, and its many
industries by studying, assessing, and navigating through the changes caused by AI and the
opportunities this technology presents to make our state a place where eve1yone can succeed;
WHEREAS, the Executive Office of Economic Development ("EOED") is actively
advancing a new economic development strategy that strives to make Massachusetts the best
place for talent and businesses, including by lengthening the state's lead in key sectors;
WHEREAS, the Executive Office of Technology Services and Security ("EOTSS") is
charged by Chapter 7D of the General Laws with supervising all executive depaiiment activities
related to information technology, including digital services and information;
WHEREAS, EOTSS and EOED are committed to exploring and studying the current
state of AI, its capabilities, potential applications, and associated risks for the state;
WHEREAS, input and feedback from leaders, experts, and other stakeholders outside of
the executive branch will help to better inf01m the development of strategies to ensure that AI
will benefit the state.
NOW, THEREFORE, I, Maura T. Healey, Governor of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution, Pait 2, c. 2, § I, Art. I,
do hereby order as follows:


Section 1. Rescission of Executive Order 628
Executive Order No. 628 is rescinded effective immediately.


Section 2. Definitions
"Artificial Intelligence," as used in this Order, is a machine-based system that can, for a given set
of human objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions.
"Generative Artificial Intelligence" ("GenAI") as used in this Order, is a type of artificial
intelligence technology that can generate many forms of content including but not limited to
texts, images, and multimedia.


@@Section 3. Establishment of AI Strategic Task Force
The AI Strategic Task Force is hereby established in the Office of the Governor to study AI and
GenAI technology and its impact on the state, including with respect to its employees,
constituents, private business, and higher education institutions; to conduct outreach and collect
input from stakeholders and experts; and to advise the Governor about how the Governor and
executive branch can achieve the objectives of this Order.
The AI Strategic Task Force shall consist of persons representing members of the business
community, higher education institutions, organized labor, and state and local government. The
AI Strategic Task Force shall be led by the Secretary of EOED and the Secretary of EOTSS, with
the assistance of two Advisory Co-Chairs selected by the Secretaries from the Task Force
membership. The Task Force shall further be comprised of 1 member from a designation by the
Senate President; 1 member from a designation by the Speaker of the House; and at least 22
additional members appointed by the Governor including (1) a representative provided by the
City of Boston; (2) a representative from members or employees of the Massachusetts
Technology Collaborative; (3) a representative of organized labor; and ( 4) other individuals with
experience in sectors such as technology, life sciences, healthcare, finance, higher education, and
local government and with knowledge of the applications of AI and GenAI. Members so
appointed shall serve at the pleasure of the Governor, in an advis01y capacity and without
compensation, and are not intended to perform services for any state agency.
The Task Force shall meet at least every other month, or more frequently as determined by the
Secretaries.


Section 4. Objectives
The objectives of the AI Strategic Task Force shall be to advise the Governor in ensuring that
Massachusetts is a leader in AI research and development by:
1. Identifying opportunities for collaboration around AI development and adoption with a
focus on leading industries in Massachusetts, such as life sciences, healthcare, finance,
and higher education institutions, including by considering the feasibility of establishing
a center of excellence for AI;
2. Recommending strategies to facilitate public investment in AI opportunities and ways to
otherwise supp01i the establishment of AI-focused start-ups in Massachusetts;
3. Recommending strategies for promoting AI-related job creation and retention for the
state, including assessing workforce impacts of AI technology and needs for associated
workforce training;
4. Recommending new policies, guidelines, or frameworks that promote responsible AI
development and use for the state, such as ethical and legal implications of AI, including
issues related to biases, equity, privacy, security, and the potential misuse of AI generated contents; and
5. Identifying ways for executive branch agencies to better achieve their missions through
the adoption of AI.


Section 5. Subcommittees
The Secretaries may convene subcommittees as needed, which may be comprised of members of
the Task Force and non-members committed to addressing issues of AI. All sub-committees shall
be chaired by a member of the Task Force, as designated by the Secretaries. Sub-committees
shall meet from time to time, as scheduled by the Secretaries or the sub-committee chair.


Section 6. Outcomes
The AI Strategic Task Force shall provide a written report to the Governor which shall
summarize the AI Strategic Task Force's work, including summarizing input received from
stakeholders and experts, and provide recommendations regarding each of its objectives.


Section 7. Effective Date
This Executive Order shall take effect immediately and shall continue in effect until 30 days after
the Task Force has delivered to the Governor its written report.
Given in Boston this 15th day of February in the year of our Lord two thousand and twenty-four, and of the Independence of the United States of America two hundred and forty-seven.