SEC. 6812. INCREASED INTELLIGENCE-RELATED ENGINEERING, RESEARCH, AND DEVELOPMENT CAPABILITIES OF MINORITY INSTITUTIONS.

(a) Plan.--
	(1) Requirement.--The Director of National Intelligence shall develop a plan to promote intelligence-related engineering, research, and development activities at covered institutions for the purpose of contributing toward the research necessary to achieve the intelligence advantage of the United States.	(2) Elements.--The plan under paragraph (1) shall include the following:
		(A) An assessment of opportunities to support engineering, research, and development at covered institutions in computer sciences, including artificial intelligence, quantum computing, and machine learning, and synthetic biology and an assessment of opportunities to support the associated workforce and physical research infrastructure of such institutions.
		(B) An assessment of opportunities to enhance the ability of covered institutions--
			(i) to participate in intelligence-related engineering, research, and development activities; and(ii) to effectively compete for intelligence-
related engineering, research and development contracts in support of the most urgent research requirements of the intelligence community.
		(C) An assessment of the activities and investments the Director determines necessary--
			(i) to expand opportunities for covered institutions to partner with other research organizations and educational institutions that the intelligence community frequently partners with to conduct research; and
			(ii) to increase participation of covered institutions in intelligence-related engineering, research, and development activities.		(D) Recommendations identifying actions that may be taken by the Director, Congress, covered institutions, and other organizations to increase participation of such institutions in intelligence-related engineering, research, and development activities and contracts.
		(E) Specific goals, incentives, and metrics to increase and measure the capacity of covered institutions to address the engineering, research, and development needs of the intelligence community.
	(3) Consultation.--In developing the plan under paragraph (1), the Director shall consult with covered institutions and other departments or agencies of the United States Government or private sector organizations that the Director determines appropriate.
	(4) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director shall submit to the congressional intelligence committees, the Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, and the Subcommittee on Defense of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, and make publicly available on the internet website of the Director, a report containing the plan under paragraph (1).
	(b) Activities to Support Research and Engineering Capacity.--
Subject to the availability of appropriations for such purpose, the Director may establish a program to award contracts, grants, or other agreements, on a competitive basis, and to perform other appropriate activities, for any of the following purposes:
	(1) Developing the capability, including the workforce and the research infrastructure, for covered institutions to more effectively compete for intelligence-related engineering, research, and development activities and contracts.
	(2) Any other purposes the Director determines appropriate to enhance the capabilities of covered institutions to carry out intelligence-related engineering, research, and development activities and contracts.
(c) Increased Partnerships Between IARPA and Covered Institutions.--
The Director shall establish goals and incentives to encourage the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity to--
	(1) partner with covered institutions to advance the research and development needs of the intelligence community through partnerships and collaborations with the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity; and
	(2) if the Director determines appropriate, foster the establishment of similar relationships between such institutions and other organizations that have partnerships with the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity.

(d) Covered Institution Defined.--In this section, the term ``covered institution'' means the following:
	(1) A part B institution (as defined in section 322 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1061)).
	(2) An institution of higher education (as defined in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965(20 U.S.C. 1001)) not covered by paragraph (1) at which not less than 50 percent of the total student enrollment consists of students from ethnic groups that are underrepresented in the fields of science and engineering, as determined by the Director of National Intelligence.