SEC. 6. United States-Israel emerging technology capabilities cooperation.

(a) Statement of policy.—It is the policy of the United States to support and encourage further defense collaboration with Israel in areas of emerging technologies capable of enabling the warfare capabilities of both the United States and Israel to meet emerging defense challenges, including in the areas of artificial intelligence, cybersecurity, robotics, quantum, and automation.

(b) Authority To establish emerging defense technology capabilities program with Israel.—

(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary of Defense, upon request by the Ministry of Defense of Israel and in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Director of National Intelligence, is authorized to carry out, jointly with Israel, research, development, test, and evaluation in areas of emerging technologies capable of enabling the warfare capabilities of the United States and Israel to meet emerging defense challenges, including in the areas of artificial intelligence, cybersecurity, robotics, quantum, and automation.

(2) PROTECTION OF SENSITIVE INFORMATION.—Any activity carried out pursuant to the authority provided by paragraph (1) shall be conducted in a manner that appropriately protects sensitive information and the national security interests of the United States and Israel.

(3) REPORT.—None of the activities described in paragraph (1) may be carried out until the date on which the Secretary of Defense submits to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of Representatives a report that sets forth the following:

(A) A memorandum of agreement between the United States and Israel regarding sharing of research and development costs for the capabilities described in paragraph (1), and any supporting documents.

(B) A certification that such memorandum of agreement—

(i) requires sharing of costs of projects, including in-kind support, between the United States and Israel;

(ii) establishes a framework to negotiate the rights to any intellectual property developed under the memorandum of agreement; and

(iii) requires the United States Government to receive semiannual reports on expenditure of funds, if any, by the Government of Israel, including a description of what the funds have been used for, when funds were expended, and an identification of entities that expended the funds.

(c) Lead agency.—Not earlier than the date on which the Secretary of Defense submits the report required by subsection (b)(3), the Secretary of Defense shall designate the Irregular Warfare Technology Support Directorate as the lead agency of the Department of Defense in carrying out this section.

(d) Semiannual reports.—The Secretary of Defense shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress on a semiannual basis a report that contains a copy of the most recent semiannual report provided by the Government of Israel to the Department of Defense pursuant to subsection (b)(3)(B)(iii).

(e) Authorization of appropriations.—There is authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2026 through 2030 to carry out the program under this section.