(a) In General.--In addition to amounts otherwise available, there 
is appropriated to the Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection for fiscal year 2025, out of any money in the Treasury not 
otherwise appropriated, to remain available until September 30, 2029, 
$6,168,000,000 for the following:
            (1) Procurement and integration of new nonintrusive 
        inspection equipment and associated civil works, including 
        artificial intelligence, machine learning, and other innovative 
        technologies, as well as other mission support, to combat the 
        entry or exit of illicit narcotics at ports of entry and along 
        the southwest, northern, and maritime borders.
            (2) Air and Marine operations' upgrading and procurement of 
        new platforms for rapid air and marine response capabilities.
            (3) Upgrades and procurement of border surveillance 
        technologies along the southwest, northern, and maritime 
        borders.
            (4) Necessary expenses, including the deployment of 
        technology, relating to the biometric entry and exit system 
        under section 7208 of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism 
        Prevention Act of 2004 (8 U.S.C. 1365b).
            (5) Screening persons entering or exiting the United States.
            (6) Initial screenings of unaccompanied alien children (as 
        defined in section 462(g) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 
        (6 U.S.C. 279(g))), consistent with the William Wilberforce 
        Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008 
        (Public Law 110-457; 122 Stat. 5044).
            (7) Enhancing border security by combating drug trafficking, 
        including fentanyl and its precursor chemicals, at the 
        southwest, northern, and maritime borders.
            (8) Commemorating efforts and events related to border 
        security.

    (b) Restrictions.--None of the funds made available under subsection 
(a) may be used for the procurement or deployment of surveillance towers 
along the southwest border and northern border that have not been tested 
and accepted by U.S. Customs and Border Protection to deliver autonomous 
capabilities.
    (c) Definition of Autonomous.--In this section, with respect to 
capabilities, the term ``autonomous'' means a system designed to apply 
artificial intelligence, machine learning, computer vision, or other 
algorithms to accurately detect, identify, classify, and track items of 
interest in real time such that the system can make operational 
adjustments without the active engagement of personnel or continuous 
human command or control.