SEC. 4. Advanced pipeline materials and technologies demonstration initiative.

(a) In general.—Subtitle E of title III of division D of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117–58) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:

“SEC. 40344. Advanced pipeline materials and technologies demonstration initiative.

“(a) Establishment of initiative.—The Secretary shall establish a demonstration initiative (in this section referred to as the ‘Initiative’) under which the Secretary, through a competitive merit review process, shall award financial assistance to eligible entities to carry out demonstration projects on low- to mid-technology readiness level subjects to achieve deployment of technologies that—

“(1) are applicable to pipelines and associated infrastructure, including liquefied natural gas facilities and underground and above ground gas and liquid fuel storage facilities; and

“(2) involve the development of next generation pipeline systems, components, and related technologies.

“(b) Demonstration project focus areas.—In carrying out the Initiative, the Secretary shall select demonstration projects that best advance research undertaken by the Department and the Department of Transportation and incorporate a range of technology focus areas, which may include the following:

“(1) Advanced leak detection and mitigation tools and technologies.

“(2) Novel materials, including alloy and nonmetallic materials, to improve integrity for new and existing pipelines, such as pipeline coatings, sleeves, and liners, and corrosion resistant materials, including maximum and minimum flow rates and immunity to electrical discharge processes.

“(3) Technologies and methods for retrofitting existing pipelines, resolving material compatibility issues, and minimizing leakage, such as field protective coatings and material treatment.

“(4) Advanced manufacturing approaches for producing, fitting, and coupling pipelines, including the fabrication of higher performance pipeline materials and new extrusion technologies or methods to join ultra-high strength and corrosion resistant materials at a scale for distribution.

“(5) Advanced sensor technologies and processes that enable real-time or in situ monitoring of pipeline assets to assess and mitigate leaks, both internal and external to the pipeline, which may include the following:

“(A) Wireless sensors, such as surface acoustic wave sensors.

“(B) Advanced and cost-effective electrochemical sensors.

“(C) Distributed fiber optic sensors.

“(D) Autonomous sensor systems, including uncrewed aircraft.

“(E) Optical methods.

“(F) Multi-use platforms for diverse sources.

“(G) Hybrid data-analysis platforms.

“(6) Advanced computational, data analytics, and machine learning models to achieve the following:

“(A) Multiscale modeling, characterization, and optimization of transmission and distribution systems and components to aid in planning for optimized and resilient infrastructure.

“(B) Correlation between sensor and emissions data at all operational points and across a variety of scales to assure system integrity spanning large areas.

“(C) Accurate material lifecycle predictions and simulation platforms to forecast pipeline health.

“(D) Secure real time autonomous monitoring and repair capabilities.

“(E) Mapping and monitoring of structural health parameters, such as corrosion.

“(7) Self-healing and self-repair functionalities, including by chemical treatment methods.

“(8) Autonomous robotic and patch technologies for inspection and repair.

“(9) Dynamic compressor technologies, including retrofit kits for existing compressor systems.

“(10) Strategies and technologies for integrated cybersecurity considerations and countering cyberattacks.

“(11) Technologies and methods to reduce potential environmental impacts, including at the atmospheric and subsurface level, associated with pipelines, liquefied natural gas facilities, and gas and liquid fuel storage facilities, such as equipment failure.

“(12) Tools to evaluate geographical pipeline data for the feasibility of repurposing existing infrastructure for safe and effective transport and use of alternative fuels, blends, and carbon dioxide.

“(13) Tools and technologies applicable to improving the safety, operation, and efficiency of liquefied natural gas facilities and gas and liquid fuel storage facilities.

“(c) Selection requirements.—In selecting eligible entities for demonstration projects under the Initiative, the Secretary shall, to the maximum extent practicable, take the following actions:

“(1) Encourage regional diversity among eligible entities, including participation by such entities located in rural States.

“(2) Prioritize technological diversity among eligible entities.

“(3) Prioritize a diverse mix of energy, substances, fuel sources, and byproducts, including the following:

“(A) Gas and liquid hydrocarbons, including natural gas, renewable natural gas, methane, ethane, and liquefied natural gas.

“(B) Carbon dioxide.

“(C) Hydrogen.

“(D) Biofuels.

“(E) Water.

“(F) Substances in the hydrogen supply chain, including ammonia and liquid organic hydrogen carriers.

“(G) Blends of gases or liquids, including hydrogen blends.

“(H) Any other source the Secretary determines appropriate.

“(4) Prioritize projects that leverage and are complementary to existing energy infrastructure.

“(5) Prioritize projects that leverage matching funds from non-Federal sources.

“(6) Ensure that selected projects are coordinated with or expand on the existing technology demonstration programs of the Department.

“(7) Evaluate projects and topics for technical performance and economic feasibility as part of lifecycle assessments for return on investment impact.

“(8) Prioritize projects that can quantifiably reduce the environmental impacts of pipelines and associated infrastructure on air, water, or soil quality in all regions of the United States, especially in underserved and rural communities.

“(d) Location.—To the maximum extent practicable, demonstration projects under the Initiative shall be located on sites with existing research infrastructure or with the ability to coordinate with existing Department user facilities and research centers.

“(e) Authorization of appropriations.—Out of funds authorized to be appropriated for—

“(1) the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, and

“(2) the Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management,
pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (6), respectively, of section 10771 of subtitle O of title VI of the Research and Development, Competition, and Innovation Act (enacted as division B of Public Law 117–167), there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Energy to carry out this section $45,000,000 for fiscal year 2025, and $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2026 through 2029.

“(f) Sunset.—This section shall terminate five years after the date of the enactment of this section.”.

(b) Clerical amendment.—The table of contents in section 1(b) of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 40343 the following new item:

“Sec. 40344. Advanced pipeline materials and technologies demonstration initiative.”.