    SEC. 245. BIOLOGICAL DATA FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.
    (a) AI Accessibility to Qualified Biological Data Resources.--
        (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
    enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall develop and 
    implement requirements that ensure qualified biological data 
    resources created by research entirely funded by the Department of 
    Defense are collected and stored in a manner that facilitates the 
    use of such qualified biological data resources for advanced 
    computational methods, including artificial intelligence.
        (2) Elements.--The requirements implemented under subsection 
    (a) shall include the following:
            (A) A definition of the term ``qualified biological data 
        resource'' for the purposes of such requirements, which shall 
        be based on one or more of the following criteria:
                (i) The type of biological data generated.
                (ii) The size of the dataset involved.
                (iii) The amount of Federal funds awarded to the 
            research that created such qualified biological data 
            resource.
                (iv) The level of sensitivity of the biological data 
            generated.
                (v) Any other factor determined appropriate by the 
            Secretary of Defense.
            (B) Guidance on the metrics and metadata included under 
        such requirements to indicate data quality, including 
        usability, interoperability, and completeness.
            (C) Requirements for tiered levels of cybersecurity 
        safeguards and access controls for the storage of biological 
        data.
            (D) Exceptions to such requirements, including for 
        biological data that may implicate national security.
            (E) Requirements for the protection of the privacy of 
        individuals.
    (b) Consultation and Considerations.--In developing and 
implementing the requirements under subsection (a), the Secretary 
shall--
        (1) consult with the Secretaries of the military departments, 
    the heads of the research laboratories of each of the Armed Forces, 
    and relevant individuals and entities in the private sector and 
    academia who have received funding for research from the Department 
    of Defense to ensure that such requirements are not overly 
    burdensome; and
        (2) review and incorporate, to the extent the Secretary 
    determines appropriate, existing Federal frameworks and standards 
    for the use of qualified biological data resources for advanced 
    computational methods.