SEC. 1512. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND MACHINE LEARNING SECURITY IN THE 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.
    (a) Cybersecurity Policy for Artificial Intelligence and Machine 
Learning Use.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with other 
appropriate Federal agencies, shall develop and implement a Department 
of Defense-wide policy for the cybersecurity and associated governance 
of artificial intelligence and machine learning systems and 
applications, as well as the models for artificial intelligence and 
machine learning used in national defense applications.
    (b) Policy Elements.--The policy required under subsection (a) 
shall address the following:
        (1) Protection against security threats specific to artificial 
    intelligence and machine learning, including model serialization 
    attacks, model tampering, data leakage, adversarial prompt 
    injection, model extraction, model jailbreaks, and supply chain 
    attacks.
        (2) Use of cybersecurity measures throughout the life cycle of 
    systems using artificial intelligence or machine learning.
        (3) Adoption of industry-recognized frameworks to guide the 
    development and implementation of artificial intelligence and 
    machine learning security best practices.
        (4) Standards for governance, testing, auditing, and monitoring 
    of systems using artificial intelligence and machine learning to 
    ensure the integrity and resilience of such systems against 
    corruption and unauthorized manipulation.
        (5) Training requirements for the workforce of the Department 
    of Defense to ensure personnel are prepared to identify and 
    mitigate vulnerabilities that are specific to artificial 
    intelligence and machine learning.
    (c) Review and Report.--
        (1) Review.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a 
    comprehensive review to identify and assess the effectiveness of 
    the artificial intelligence and machine learning cybersecurity and 
    associated governance practices of the Department of Defense.
        (2) Report.--
            (A) In general.--Not later than August 31, 2026, the 
        Secretary of Defense shall submit to the Committees on Armed 
        Services of the House of Representatives and the Senate a 
        report on the findings of the review conducted under paragraph 
        (1).
            (B) Contents.--The report required under subparagraph (A) 
        shall include--
                (i) an assessment of the current security practices for 
            artificial intelligence and machine learning across the 
            Department of Defense;
                (ii) an assessment of the cybersecurity risks posed by 
            the use of authorized and unauthorized artificial 
            intelligence software, including models developed by 
            companies headquartered in or operating from foreign 
            countries of concern, by the Department;
                (iii) an identification of gaps in the existing 
            security measures of the Department related to threats 
            specific to the use of artificial intelligence and machine 
            learning;
                (iv) an analysis of the potential of security 
            management, access, and runtime capabilities for artificial 
            intelligence in the commercial sector for use by the 
            Department to defend systems using artificial intelligence 
            from threats, minimize data exposure resulting from the use 
            of such systems, and maintain the trustworthiness of 
            applications of the Department that use artificial 
            intelligence;
                (v) an evaluation of the alignment of the policies of 
            the Department with industry frameworks;
                (vi) recommend actions to enhance the security, 
            integrity, and governance of artificial intelligence and 
            machine learning models used by the Department; and
                (vii) an identification of any additional authorities, 
            resources, or legislative actions required for the 
            Department to effectively implement artificial intelligence 
            and machine learning model security policy required by 
            subsection (a).
    (d) Definitions.--In this section:
        (1) The terms ``artificial intelligence'' and ``machine 
    learning'' have the meanings given such terms, respectively, in 
    section 5001 of the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act 
    of 2020 (15 U.S.C. 9401).