SEC. 1513. PHYSICAL AND CYBERSECURITY PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS.
    (a) Security Framework.--
        (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall develop a 
    framework for the implementation of cybersecurity and physical 
    security standards and best practices relating to covered 
    artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies to 
    mitigate risks to the Department of Defense from the use of such 
    technologies.
        (2) Coverage of relevant aspects of security.--The framework 
    developed under paragraph (1) shall cover all relevant aspects of 
    the security of artificial intelligence and machine learning 
    systems of the Department of Defense, including the following:
            (A) Risk posed to and by the workforce of the Department of 
        Defense, including insider threat risks.
            (B) Training and workforce development requirements, 
        including with respect to the following:
                (i) Artificial intelligence security awareness.
                (ii) Artificial intelligence-specific threats and 
            vulnerabilities.
                (iii) Development of a continuum of professional 
            development and education of artificial intelligence 
            security expertise.
            (C) Risks to the supply chains of such systems, including 
        counterfeit parts or data poisoning risks.
            (D) Risks relating to adversarial tampering with artificial 
        intelligence systems.
            (E) Risks relating to the unintended exposure or theft of 
        artificial intelligence systems or data.
            (F) Security posture management practices, including 
        governance of security measures, continuous monitoring, and 
        incident reporting procedures.
            (G) An evaluation of commercially available platforms for 
        continuous monitoring and assessment of such systems.
        (3) Risk-based framework.--The framework developed under 
    paragraph (1) shall be risk-based, including security that is 
    proportional to the national security or foreign policy risks posed 
    by the covered artificial intelligence and machine learning 
    technology being stolen or tampered with.
        (4) Use of existing frameworks.--To the maximum extent 
    feasible, the framework developed under paragraph (1) shall--
            (A) draw on existing cybersecurity reference documents, 
        including the NIST Special Publication 800 series; and
            (B) be implemented as an extension or augmentation of 
        existing cybersecurity frameworks developed by the Department 
        of Defense, including the Cybersecurity Maturity Model 
        Certification framework.
        (5) Addressing extreme security risks.--
            (A) Highly capable cyber threat actors.--The framework 
        developed under paragraph (1) shall prioritize the most highly 
        capable artificial intelligence systems that may be of highest 
        interest to cyber threat actors, based on risk assessments and 
        threat reporting.
            (B) Security levels.--The Secretary shall ensure that the 
        framework developed under paragraph (1) imposes requirements 
        for security on contractors that are designed to mitigate the 
        cyberesecurity risks posed by the cyber threat actors described 
        in subparagraph (A), with the most stringent security 
        requirements under such frameworks providing protection that is 
        similar to the protection offered by national security systems 
        (as defined in section 3552(b)(6) of title 44, United States 
        Code).
            (C) General design with specific components.--To the extent 
        feasible, any additional security requirements developed 
        pursuant to subparagraph (B) shall be designed generally for 
        all software systems of the Department of Defense, but may 
        contain components designed specifically for highly capable 
        artificial intelligence systems.
    (b) Security Requirements.--
        (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall amend the 
    Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement, or take other 
    similar action, to require covered entities to implement the best 
    practices described in subsection (a) under the framework developed 
    under such subsection.
        (2) Risk-based rules.--Any requirements implemented pursuant to 
    paragraph (1) shall, to the extent practicable, be narrowly 
    tailored to the specific covered artificial intelligence and 
    machine learning technologies developed, deployed, stored, or 
    hosted by a covered entity, and shall be calibrated accordingly to 
    the different tasks involved in development, deployment, storage, 
    or hosting of components of such covered artificial intelligence 
    and machine learning technologies.
        (3) Cost-benefit consideration.--
            (A) In general.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the 
        Secretary of Defense shall--
                (i) consider the costs and benefits to the Department 
            of Defense and to the national security and technological 
            leadership of the United States, of imposing security 
            requirements on covered entities; and
                (ii) to the extent feasible, design the requirements 
            implemented pursuant to such paragraph to allow for trade 
            space analysis by the Department in a transparent manner 
            between competing requirements in order to minimize the 
            costs and maximize the benefits of such requirements.
            (B) Weighing costs of slowing down development.--In 
        carrying out subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall weigh the 
        costs of slowing the development and deployment of artificial 
        intelligence and machine learning against the benefits of 
        mitigating national security risks and potential security risks 
        to the Department of Defense from using commercial software for 
        imposing additional physical or cybersecurity requirements for 
        such systems.
    (c) Private Sector Collaboration.--In carrying out the requirements 
of subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense shall seek to collaborate 
with industry and academia in the development of the framework under 
such subsection using a process for consultation that uses a new or 
existing mechanism for public-private partnerships.
    (d) Implementation Plan.--The framework required by subsection 
(a)(1) shall include a detailed plan for the implementation of the 
framework that--
        (1) establishes timelines and milestones for achieving the 
    objectives outlined in the framework;
        (2) identifies resource requirements and funding mechanisms; 
    and
        (3) provides metrics for measuring progress and effectiveness.
    (e) Reporting Requirements.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees an update on the status of 
implementation of the requirements of this section.
    (f) Definitions.--In this section:
        (1) The term ``artificial intelligence'' has the meaning given 
    such term in 238(g) of the John S. McCain National Defense 
    Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 
    U.S.C. 4061 note prec.).
        (2) The term ``covered artificial intelligence and machine 
    learning technology'' means an artificial intelligence or machine 
    learning system acquired by the Department of Defense or an element 
    of the Department and all associated components involved in the 
    development and deployment lifecycle of such system, including 
    source code, numerical parameters (including model weights) of the 
    trained artificial intelligence or machine learning system, details 
    of any methods and algorithms used to develop such system, data 
    used in the development of such system, and software used for 
    evaluating the trustworthiness of the artificial intelligence or 
    machine learning system during development or deployment.
        (3) The term ``covered entity'' means an entity that enters 
    into a contract or other agreement with the Department of Defense 
    under which such entity engages in the development, deployment, 
    storage, or hosting of one or more covered artificial intelligence 
    and machine learning technologies.