SEC. 1532. GUIDANCE AND PROHIBITION ON USE OF CERTAIN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE.
    (a) Guidance and Prohibitions.--
        (1) Exclusion and removal from department systems and 
    devices.--Except as provided in subsection (b), not later than 30 
    days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
    Defense shall require the exclusion and removal of covered 
    artificial intelligence from the systems and devices of the 
    Department of Defense.
        (2) Consideration of guidance for department systems and 
    devices.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of 
    this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall consider issuing 
    Department of Defense-wide guidance to exclude and remove from 
    systems and devices of the Department artificial intelligence 
    developed by a covered artificial intelligence company which the 
    Secretary determines poses a risk to national security.
        (3) Prohibition for contractors.--
            (A) Use of covered artificial intelligence.--Except as 
        provided in subsection (b), not later than 30 days after the 
        date of enactment of this Act, no contractor may, during the 
        period of performance of such contractor under a contract with 
        the Department of Defense, use covered artificial intelligence 
        with respect to the performance of a contract with the 
        Department.
            (B) Use of artificial intelligence developed by a covered 
        artificial intelligence company.--Except as provided in 
        subsection (b), if the Secretary of Defense issues guidance 
        described in paragraph (2) with respect to an artificial 
        intelligence described in such paragraph, no contractor may, 
        during the period of performance of such contractor under a 
        contract with the Department of Defense, use such artificial 
        intelligence with respect to the performance of a contract with 
        the Department.
    (b) Waiver.--
        (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense may waive a 
    prohibition under subsection (a), on a case-by-case basis, if the 
    Secretary determines that the waiver is necessary--
            (A) for the purpose of scientifically valid research (as 
        defined in section 102 of the Education Sciences Reform Act of 
        2002 (20 U.S.C. 9501));
            (B) for the purpose of evaluation, training, testing, or 
        other analysis needed for national security;
            (C) for the purpose of conducting counter terrorism, 
        counterintelligence, or other operational military activities 
        supporting national security; or
            (D) for the purpose of fulfilling mission critical 
        functions.
        (2) Mitigation of risks.--If the Secretary of Defense issues a 
    waiver pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary shall take such 
    steps as the Secretary considers necessary to mitigate any risks 
    due to the issuance of the waiver.
    (c) Definitions.--In this section:
        (1) The term ``artificial intelligence'' has the meaning given 
    such term in section 5002 of the National Artificial Intelligence 
    Initiative Act of 2020 (15 U.S.C. 9401) and includes the systems 
    and techniques described in paragraphs (1) through (5) of section 
    238(g) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for 
    Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. 4061 note prec.).
        (2) The term ``covered artificial intelligence'' means--
            (A) any artificial intelligence, or successor artificial 
        intelligence, developed by the Chinese company DeepSeek; or
            (B) any artificial intelligence, or successor artificial 
        intelligence, developed by High Flyer or an entity owned by, 
        funded by, or supported by High Flyer or an entity with respect 
        to which High Flyer directly or indirectly owns at least a 20 
        percent stake.
        (3) The term ``covered nation'' has the meaning given such term 
    in section 4872 of title 10, United States Code.
        (4) The term ``covered artificial intelligence company'' means 
    an entity that produces or provides artificial intelligence models 
    or applications and--
            (A) is included on--
                (i) the Consolidated Screening List maintained by the 
            International Trade Administration of the Department of 
            Commerce; or
                (ii) the civil-military fusion list maintained under 
            section 1260H of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National 
            Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 
            116-283; 10 U.S.C. 113 note);
            (B) is domiciled in a covered nation; or
            (C) is subject to unmitigated foreign ownership, control, 
        or influence by a covered nation, as determined by the 
        Secretary of Defense in accordance with the National Industrial 
        Security Program or any successor to such program.