SEC. 1533. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE MODEL ASSESSMENT AND OVERSIGHT.
    (a) Cross-functional Team for Artificial Intelligence Model 
Assessment and Oversight.--
        (1) Establishment.--The Secretary of Defense shall, in 
    accordance with section 911 of the National Defense Authorization 
    Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328; 10 U.S.C. 111 note), 
    establish a cross-functional team for artificial intelligence model 
    assessment and oversight (in this section referred to as the 
    ``Cross-Functional Team'').
        (2) Purpose.--The Cross-Functional Team shall develop a 
    standardized assessment framework and governance structure to 
    facilitate the evaluation of, collaboration on, and enablement of 
    the rapid development or procurement of artificial intelligence 
    models employed by the Department of Defense.
        (3) Composition.--
            (A) Leadership.--The Chief Digital and Artificial 
        Intelligence Officer of the Department of Defense shall be the 
        head of the Cross-Functional Team.
            (B) Membership.--The Secretary of Defense shall ensure that 
        the Cross-Functional Team includes representatives from--
                (i) the Office of the Chief Information Officer of the 
            Department of Defense;
                (ii) the chief artificial intelligence officers of the 
            military departments, or in the absence of such position, 
            the individual responsible for leading artificial 
            intelligence efforts within each military department;
                (iii) the chief information officers of the military 
            departments;
                (iv) the chief artificial intelligence officers of the 
            combatant commands and the Joint Staff, or in the absence 
            of such position, the individuals responsible for leading 
            artificial intelligence efforts within each such command 
            and the Joint Staff;
                (v) the chief information officers of the combatant 
            commands and the Joint Staff, or in the absence of such 
            position, the individuals responsible for leading 
            information technology efforts within each such command and 
            the Joint Staff;
                (vi) the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and 
            Engineering;
                (vii) the service acquisition executive of each of the 
            military departments; and
                (viii) such other components as the Secretary 
            determines appropriate.
        (4) Duties.--The Cross-Functional Team shall do the following:
            (A) Develop a standardized assessment framework for 
        artificial intelligence models currently used by the Department 
        of Defense.
            (B) Establish Department of Defense-wide guidelines for 
        evaluating future artificial intelligence models being 
        considered for use by the Department.
            (C) Develop governance structures for the development, 
        assessment, testing, and deployment of artificial intelligence 
        models.
            (D) Identify appropriate assessment levels for the 
        performance of artificial intelligence models based on ultimate 
        use case-based risk.
            (E) Establish mechanisms for collaboration between 
        components of the Department of Defense regarding the 
        development, testing, assessment, and deployment of artificial 
        intelligence models.
            (F) Develop processes for the submission, review, and 
        approval of use cases for artificial intelligence models 
        against military and non-military activities of the Department 
        of Defense.
        (5) Framework content.--The standardized assessment framework 
    required by paragraph (2) shall include--
            (A) standards for the performance of artificial 
        intelligence models;
            (B) requirements for documentation of the development 
        artificial intelligence models;
            (C) procedures for testing artificial intelligence models;
            (D) compliance with ethical principles regarding the use of 
        artificial intelligence models;
            (E) methodologies for assessing artificial intelligence 
        models and time periods for validating artificial intelligence 
        models;
            (F) security requirements and compliance requirements, 
        including the Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program 
        established under section 3608 of title 44, United States Code;
            (G) procedures for the Department of Defense to use 
        assessments of artificial intelligence models conducted by 
        Executive agencies other than the Department to fulfill 
        requirements under the framework; and
            (H) such other elements as the Cross-Functional Team 
        determines appropriate.
    (b) Functional Leads for Artificial Intelligence Application.--
        (1) Designation.--The Secretary of Defense shall designate such 
    organizations of the Department of Defense as the Secretary 
    considers appropriate to serve as functional leads for artificial 
    intelligence applications used by the Department.
        (2) Selection criteria.--In designating functional leads under 
    paragraph (1), the Secretary of Defense shall consider--
            (A) subject matter expertise;
            (B) equities in the functional area; and
            (C) capability to establish assessment standards.
        (3) CDAO responsibilities.--The Chief Digital and Artificial 
    Intelligence Officer of the Department of Defense shall--
            (A) serve as the functional lead for business systems of 
        the Department of Defense using artificial intelligence models; 
        and
            (B) provide Department-wide guidance on commercial 
        artificial intelligence models.
    (c) Assessments of Major Artificial Intelligence Systems.--The 
Secretary of Defense shall assess all major artificial intelligence 
systems using the standard assessment framework developed under 
subsection (a)(2).
    (d) Administration.--
        (1) In general.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary 
    shall ensure the following:
            (A) The Cross-Functional Team is established in accordance 
        with subsection (a) on or before June 1, 2026.
            (B) The functional leads for artificial intelligence 
        application are designated in accordance with subsection (b) on 
        or before January 1, 2027.
            (C) The Cross-Function Team completes development of the 
        standardized assessment framework and governance structure 
        required by subsection (a)(2) on or before June 1, 2027.
            (D) The assessment of major artificial intelligence systems 
        required by subsection (c) is completed on or before January 1, 
        2028.
        (2) Congressional briefing.--Not later than 30 days after the 
    completion of an activity described in subparagraphs (A) through 
    (D) of paragraph (1), the Secretary of Defense shall provide the 
    congressional defense committees a briefing on the status of the 
    Secretary in carrying out this section.
    (e) Sunset and Transition.--
        (1) Sunset.--The Cross-Functional Team shall terminate on 
    December 31, 2030.
        (2) Transition.--Not later than June 30, 2030, the Secretary of 
    Defense shall designate an element of the Department of Defense to 
    succeed the Cross-Functional Team and develop a plan to transfer 
    the duties of the Cross-Functional Team described in subsection 
    (a)(4) to such successor element.
        (3) Report on activities of successor organization.--Not later 
    than one year after the date on which the Cross-Functional Team is 
    terminated, and not less frequently than once each year thereafter 
    until the date that is three years after the date on which the 
    Cross-Functional Team is terminated, the Secretary of Defense shall 
    submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the 
    activities of the element of the Department of Defense to which the 
    duties of the Cross-Functional Team were transferred.
    (f) Definitions.--In this section:
        (1) The term ``artificial intelligence'' has the meaning given 
    in section 238(g) of the John S. McCain National Defense 
    Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 
    U.S.C. note prec. 4061).
        (2) The term ``functional area'' refers to a specialized 
    functional, operational, or subject-matter area within the 
    Department of Defense.
        (3)(A) The term ``major artificial intelligence system'' means 
    an artificial intelligence system of the Department of Defense 
    that--
                (i) is integrated with, or materially affects the 
            operation of, an information system that--

                    (I) is categorized as high-impact under section 
                3554 of title 44, United States Code; or
                    (II) if compromised, would have a serious adverse 
                effect on organizational operations, organizational 
                assets, or individuals;

                (ii) is used by not fewer than 500 users of the 
            Department annually; and
                (iii) is employed in support of--

                    (I) military operations, training, or planning 
                activities; or
                    (II) functions of the Department, including 
                business operations, human resources management, 
                administrative functions, or strategic planning 
                activities.

            (B) The term ``major artificial intelligence system'' does 
        not include an artificial intelligence system used solely for 
        research, development, testing, or evaluation that has not been 
        deployed for operational use.
        (4) The terms ``military department'' and ``service acquisition 
    executive'' have the meanings given such terms, respectively, in 
    section 101(a) of title 10, United States Code.