    SEC. 624. IMPROVEMENTS TO BASIC ALLOWANCE FOR HOUSING.
    (a) Increasing Awareness.--The Secretary of Defense shall seek to 
improve transparency of the calculation of BAH by--
        (1) developing a clear, accessible document that explains how 
    rates of BAH are determined, including methodology and types of 
    data sources used, which shall be--
            (A) reviewed and updated not less frequently than annually 
        and as rates and calculation methods change; and
            (B) made available on a publicly accessible internet 
        website and distributed across all relevant components of the 
        Department of Defense; and
        (2) providing to members of the Armed Forces when such members 
    experience a permanent change of station, permanent change of 
    assignment, change in dependency status, change in grade, or any 
    other event that may impact the eligibility of such members for or 
    rate of BAH--
            (A) the information included in the document developed 
        under paragraph (1); and
            (B) an explanation of the type of rental housing the rate 
        of BAH received by such members is intended to support in each 
        locality.
    (b) Study to Evaluate Alternative Rate Calculation.--
        (1) Study.--
            (A) In general.--Not later than September 30, 2026, the 
        Secretary of Defense shall seek to enter into an agreement with 
        a covered entity to conduct a study in which the covered 
        entity--
                (i) assesses the adequacy of the current BAH for MHAs 
            selected under paragraph (3), including a review of the 
            commuting times and distances of members of the Armed 
            Forces and the overall affordability of housing in such 
            MHAs;
                (ii) reviews existing methods of calculating BAH and 
            proposes methods of calculating BAH described in paragraph 
            (2) for MHAs selected under paragraph (3) that are more 
            efficient and accurate than such existing methods, as 
            appropriate; and
                (iii) evaluates the feasibility and advisability of 
            using machine learning and artificial intelligence in the 
            calculation of BAH and, if feasible and advisable, 
            incorporates machine learning and artificial intelligence 
            into the proposed methods described in clause (i).
            (B) Rule of construction.--During the study conducted in 
        accordance with subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall pay BAH 
        in MHAs selected under paragraph (3) at rates prescribed under 
        section 403 of title 37, United States Code.
        (2) Proposed monthly rates.--A proposed monthly rate of BAH 
    described in this paragraph--
            (A) accurately reflects housing prices in the MHA subject 
        to such rate; and
            (B) is sufficient for military families who reside in such 
        MHA to procure adequate and affordable housing.
        (3) Mhas.--The Secretary shall select not fewer than 15 MHAs 
    for the covered entity to evaluate in the study conducted in 
    accordance with paragraph (1). In selecting MHAs for evaluation 
    under such study, the Secretary shall consider factors including 
    the following:
            (A) Variety of geographic location.
            (B) The ranks of members who reside in an MHA.
            (C) Whether members who reside in an MHA have dependents.
            (D) Economic factors including inflation, cost of living, 
        and the cost of private mortgage insurance.
        (4) Completion.--An agreement entered into under paragraph 
    (1)(A) shall require the study conducted under such agreement to be 
    completed not later than the date that is three years after the 
    date on which the Secretary and the covered entity enter into such 
    agreement.
        (5) Annual briefings.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
    of the enactment of this Act, and on an annual basis thereafter 
    until the completion of the study conducted in accordance with 
    paragraph (1), the Secretary shall provide to the Committees on 
    Armed Services of the Senate and the House of Representatives a 
    briefing on the status of the study under this section.
        (6) Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
    completion of the study conducted in accordance with paragraph (1), 
    the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of 
    the Senate and House of Representatives a report containing the 
    results of such study. Such report shall include--
            (A) an evaluation by the Secretary of the proposed methods 
        of calculating BAH by a covered entity pursuant to an agreement 
        under paragraph (1); and
            (B) any recommendations of the Secretary for legislation to 
        improve the methods of calculating BAH based on the study.
    (c) Definitions.--In this section:
        (1) The term ``BAH'' means the basic allowance for housing for 
    members of the uniformed services under section 403 of title 37, 
    United States Code.
        (2) The term ``covered entity'' means an entity or combination 
    of entities--
            (A) with combined expertise in data analysis and machine 
        learning and access to relevant data on local rental rates in 
        real estate markets in the MHAs selected under subsection 
        (b)(3); and
            (B) that has not participated in anticompetitive price-
        fixing in a real estate market.
        (3) The term ``MHA'' means military housing area.
