SEC. 3117. APPROPRIATE SCOPING OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH 
WITHIN THE NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ADMINISTRATION.
    (a) In General.--Subtitle B of title XLVIII of the Atomic Energy 
Defense Act (50 U.S.C. 2791 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end 
the following section:
``SEC. 4816. APPROPRIATE SCOPING OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH 
WITHIN THE ADMINISTRATION.
    ``(a) In General.--Funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act 
or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2026, or any subsequent 
fiscal year, for the Administration for the purposes of conducting 
research and development of artificial intelligence technologies, 
executing a program to develop or manage the application of such 
technologies, or developing, acquiring, or sustaining any associated 
computing hardware or supporting infrastructure may only be used to 
support the nuclear security missions of the Administration.
    ``(b) Rule of Construction.--The limitation described in subsection 
(a) may not be interpreted--
        ``(1) to prohibit the establishment of an enduring national 
    security artificial intelligence research and development program 
    in any component of the Department of Energy other than the 
    Administration or in any other Federal agency; or
        ``(2) to impede the use of resources of the Administration, 
    including resources provided by a national security laboratory or a 
    nuclear weapons production facility site, to support the execution 
    of an enduring national security artificial intelligence research 
    and development program or activity, if such support is provided--
            ``(A) on a full cost recovery basis, including any 
        associated infrastructure or utility costs, to an entity that 
        is not a component of the Department of Energy; and
            ``(B) in a manner that does not interfere with the nuclear 
        security mission of such laboratory or facility.''.
    (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents for the Atomic 
Energy Defense Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 4815 the following new item:
``Sec. 4816. Appropriate scoping of artificial intelligence research 
          within the Administration.''.