SEC. 5301. POST DATA PILOT PROGRAM.
    (a) Post Data and AI Pilot Program.--
        (1) Establishment.--The Secretary is authorized to establish a 
    program, which shall be known as the ``Post Data Program'' 
    (referred to in this section as the ``Program''), that shall be 
    overseen by the Department's Chief Data and Artificial Intelligence 
    Officer.
        (2) Goals.--The goals of the Program shall include the 
    following:
            (A) Cultivating a data and artificial intelligence culture 
        at diplomatic posts globally, including data fluency and data 
        collaboration.
            (B) Promoting data integration with Department of State 
        Headquarters.
            (C) Creating operational efficiencies, supporting 
        innovation, and enhancing mission impact.
    (b) Implementation Plan.--
        (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
    enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the 
    appropriate congressional committees an implementation plan that 
    outlines strategies for--
            (A) advancing the goals described in subsection (a)(2);
            (B) hiring data and artificial intelligence officers at 
        United States diplomatic posts; and
            (C) allocation of necessary resources to sustain the 
        Program.
        (2) Annual reporting requirement.--Not later than 180 days 
    after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually 
    thereafter for the following three years, the Secretary shall 
    submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees 
    regarding the status of the implementation plan required under 
    paragraph (1).
    (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
        (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
    Appropriations of the House of Representatives; and
        (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
    Appropriations of the Senate.