A BILL
  To require the Secretary of Health and Human Services to conduct a 
  study on strategies for the application of artificial intelligence 
 technologies that can be used in the health care industry to improve 
administrative and clerical work and preserve the privacy and security 
                of patient data, and for other purposes.
    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
    This Act may be cited as the ``AI in Health Care Efficiency and 
Study Act''.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
    Congress finds the following:
            (1) Administrative and clerical work contribute 
        significantly to health care costs and health care provider 
        burnout.
            (2) Artificial intelligence technologies have the potential 
        to streamline clerical work and record keeping, allowing health 
        care providers to spend more time with patients.
            (3) Protection of patient privacy and compliance with 
        regulations promulgated pursuant to section 264 of the Health 
        Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. 
        1320d-2 note) are essential in the development and deployment 
        of artificial intelligence tools in health care.

SEC. 3. STUDY ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN THE HEALTH CARE INDUSTRY.
    (a) In General.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the 
enactment of this section, the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
(in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall conduct a study on 
strategies for the application of artificial intelligence technologies 
that can be used across the health care industry, including health care 
providers and health plans as defined under section 262 of the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. 1320d) 
and covered entities and business associates as defined under section 
160.103 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations, to improve 
administrative and clerical processes and protect the privacy and 
security of patient data in programs and activities within the 
jurisdiction of the Department of Health and Human Services.
    (b) Contents.--In conducting the study under subsection (a), the 
Secretary shall evaluate existing strategies and identify additional 
strategies to apply artificial intelligence technologies to--
            (1) reduce administrative burden and improve efficiency in 
        administrative and clerical tasks, including scheduling, claims 
        processing, documentation, prior authorization workflows, and 
        other operational tasks performed by health care providers and 
        health plans;
            (2) improve the accuracy, timeliness, and interoperability 
        of patient record-keeping, including electronic health record 
        documentation;
            (3) ensure the privacy, security, and integrity of patient 
        data, including compliance with regulations promulgated 
        pursuant to section 264 of the Health Insurance Portability and 
        Accountability Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. 1320d-2 note) and any 
        applicable standards established by the National Institute of 
        Standards and Technology; and
            (4) evaluate how artificial intelligence technologies can 
        be used to detect, prevent, and mitigate cybersecurity attacks 
        on health care providers, including--
                    (A) ransomware incidents;
                    (B) data breaches; and
                    (C) other threats experienced by healthcare 
                providers.
(c) Consultation.--In carrying out the study required under 
subsection (a), the Secretary shall seek to consult with--
            (1) the Director of the National Institute of Standards and 
        Technology;
            (2) the Director of the National Institutes of Health;
            (3) the Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and 
        Quality;
            (4) the Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy/Office of 
        the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology for 
        the Department of Health and Human Services;
            (5) the Director of the Office for Civil Rights for the 
        Department of Health and Human Services;
            (6) academic institutions;
            (7) artificial intelligence developers;
            (8) civil rights experts;
            (9) health care providers;
            (10) hospital associations;
            (11) information technology vendors that serve the health 
        care industry;
            (12) nonprofit research institutions; and
            (13) patient privacy experts.
(d) Report.--Not later than 6 months after the Secretary completes 
the study required under subsection (a), the Secretary shall submit to 
the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives 
and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the 
Senate a report on the study conducted under subsection (a) that 
contains--
            (1) the findings and conclusions of the study, including 
        identified risks, opportunities, and implementation challenges;
            (2) an assessment of existing artificial intelligence tools 
        currently in use for administrative or clerical functions in 
        the health care industry, including their effectiveness, 
        limitations, and implications for provider burden;
            (3) recommendations for future research and pilot programs 
        led or supported by the Department of Health and Human Services 
        relating to the use of artificial intelligence in 
        administrative and clerical functions within the health care 
        industry; and
            (4) policy options for Congress and the Secretary to 
        support the development, testing, implementation, and oversight 
        of artificial intelligence tools that enhance administrative 
        efficiency in health care while ensuring strong protections for 
        patient privacy and data security.