A BILL
To establish in the Office of Science and Technology Policy the Artificial Intelligence Literacy and Education Commission, and for other purposes.


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,


SECTION 1. Short title.


This Act may be cited as the “Artificial Intelligence for Advancing Literacy and Learning Act” or the “AI for ALL Act”.


SEC. 2. Establishment of the Artificial Intelligence Literacy and Education Commission.


(a) In general.—There is established in the Office of Science and Technology Policy a commission to be known as the “Artificial Intelligence Literacy and Education Commission”.


(b) Membership.—The members of the Commission shall be composed of the following:


(1) The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, who shall serve as the Chairperson.


(2) A representative of the Office of Management and Budget with expertise in AI, appointed by the Director of such Office.


(3) A representative of the National Science Foundation with expertise in AI, appointed by the Director of such Foundation.


(4) A representative of the Department of Commerce with expertise in AI, appointed by the Secretary of Commerce.


(5) A representative of the Department of Education with expertise in AI, appointed by the Secretary of Education.


(6) A representative of the Department of Labor with expertise in AI, appointed by the Secretary of Labor.


(7) A representative of the General Services Administration with expertise in AI, appointed by the Administrator of General Services.


(8) An individual with AI expertise appointed by the Chairperson from an institution of higher education that is leading advanced research of AI.


(9) An individual with AI expertise appointed by the Chairperson from a private sector entity.


(10) An individual appointed by the Chairperson from an organization that develops AI literacy recommendations.


(c) Meetings.—


(1) REGULAR MEETINGS.—The Commission shall hold, at the call of the Chairperson, at least one meeting every three months. The Commission may hold, at the call of the Chairperson, such other meetings as the Chairperson determines appropriate.


(2) INITIAL MEETING.—The Commission shall hold the first meeting of the Commission not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.


(d) Duties of the Commission.—In addition to the duties of the Commission under sections 3 and 4, the Commission shall carry out the following:


(1) Streamline, improve, and augment AI literacy and education as the Chairperson determines necessary for the ability of persons in the United States to effectively and efficiently utilize AI.


(2) To the extent practicable, coordinate and promote AI literacy and education efforts at the State and local level, including by promoting partnerships among Federal, State, and local governments, nonprofit organizations, institutions of higher education, research institutions, and private sector entities.


(e) Non-Termination; exemption from charter requirement.—Section 1013 of title 5, United States Code, shall not apply to the Commission.


SEC. 3. Development and dissemination of materials.


The Commission shall carry out the following:


(1) Develop multilingual materials and resources promoting AI literacy and education in the United States.


(2) Disseminate to the general public such materials and resources in any form or manner the Chairperson determines appropriate, which may include any of the following:
(A) Establishing a publicly available website that contains such materials and resources.
(B) Conducting a multilingual national public service multimedia campaign.


SEC. 4. National strategy for AI literacy and education.


(a) In general.—Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall carry out the following:


(1) Develop a national strategy for the Federal Government to carry out the following:
(A) Identify the opportunities and challenges for the Federal Government with respect to improving the AI literacy and education of persons in the United States.
(B) In accordance with such identifications, improve such literacy and education, including by ensuring such persons understand the following:
(i) AI.
(ii) How AI has evolved and is expected to evolve.
(iii) How to utilize AI safely and effectively.
(C) Ensure such improvements enable for the United States continued global leadership in AI.


(2) Submit to Congress such strategy.


(b) Subsequent strategies.—


(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than six months after submitting the strategy pursuant to subsection (a) and biennially thereafter, the Chairperson shall determine whether such strategy is outdated.


(2) UPDATES.—If the Chairperson, pursuant to paragraph (1) or (3), as the case may be, makes such a determination in the affirmative, the Commission shall submit to Congress an updated strategy that includes any changes the Chairperson determines necessary.


(3) FURTHER DETERMINATIONS.—If an updated strategy is submitted under paragraph (2), not later than two years after such submission and biennially thereafter, the Chairperson shall make a determination described in paragraph (1).


(c) Coordination.—The Commission shall, as appropriate, coordinate the efforts of the Federal Government to implement a strategy submitted under this section.


SEC. 5. Definitions.


In this Act:


(1) AI.—The term “AI” has the meaning given the term “artificial intelligence” in section 238(g) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (10 U.S.C. 4061 note prec.).


(2) CHAIRPERSON.—The term “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Commission.


(3) COMMISSION.—The term “Commission” means the Artificial Intelligence Literacy and Education Commission established under section 2.


(4) INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION.—The term “institution of higher education” has the meaning given such term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001).