 STATE OF RHODE ISLAND
IN GENERAL ASSEMBLY
JANUARY SESSION, A.D. 2023


AN ACT


RELATING TO COMMERCIAL LAW - GENERAL REGULATORY PROVISIONS --
GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE MODELS


Introduced By: Representatives Carson, Baginski, and McNamara
Date Introduced: April 19, 2023
Referred To: House Innovation, Internet, & Technology


It is enacted by the General Assembly as follows:


SECTION 1. Title 6 of the General Laws entitled "COMMERCIAL LAW — GENERAL REGULATORY PROVISIONS" is hereby amended by adding thereto the following chapter:


CHAPTER 59
GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE MODELS

 6-59-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate generative artificial intelligence models, such as ChatGPT, in order to protect the public’s safety, privacy, and intellectual property rights.

 6-59-2. Definition.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
(1) “Large-scale generative artificial intelligence model” means a machine learning model with a capacity of at least one billion (1,000,000,000) parameters that generates text or other forms of output, such as ChatGPT.
(2) “Parameter” means any variable or value used to control the operation or output of a generative artificial intelligence model.

 6-59-3. Operating standards.
Any company operating a large-scale generative artificial intelligence model shall adhere to the following operating standards:
(1) The model shall not be used to engage in discrimination or bias against any individual or group based on protected characteristics, as defined by state or federal law;
(2) In order to prevent plagiarism, the model shall be programmed to generate all text with a distinctive watermark or offer an authentication process that allows a user to determine whether a particular output was generated by the model;
(3) The company shall implement reasonable security measures to protect the data of individuals used to train the model;
(4) The company shall obtain informed consent from individuals before collecting, using or disclosing their data;
(5) The company shall delete or de-identify any data collected from individuals if it is no longer needed for the intended purpose of the model; and
(6) The company shall conduct regular risk assessments to identify, assess and mitigate reasonably foreseeable risks and cognizable harms related to their products and services, including in the design, development and implementation of such products and services.

 6-59-4. Registration with the attorney general.
(a) Any company operating a large-scale generative artificial intelligence model shall register with the attorney general within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter.


(b) The registration shall include the following information:
(1) The name and contact information of the company;
(2) A description of the large-scale generative artificial intelligence model, including its capacity, training data, intended use, design process and methodologies; and
(3) Information on the company's data collection, storage and security practices.


(c) The attorney general shall maintain a public registry of all companies registered under this chapter.

 6-59-5. Enforcement.
(a) The attorney general shall promulgate and adopt rules and regulations for the purposes of implementing this chapter.


(b) To remedy violations of this chapter and for other relief that may be appropriate, the attorney general may bring an action against a person.


SECTION 2. This act shall take effect on September 1, 2023.



 EXPLANATION
BY THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
OF
AN ACT
RELATING TO COMMERCIAL LAW - GENERAL REGULATORY PROVISIONS --
GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE MODELS


This act would authorize the office of attorney general to promulgate, adopt and enforce rules and regulations concerning generative artificial intelligence models, such as ChatGPT, in order to protect the public’s safety, privacy, and intellectual property rights.


This act would take effect on September 1, 2023.