 THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF PENNSYLVANIA


HOUSE RESOLUTION
No. 170 Session of 2023


INTRODUCED BY MERSKI, PIELLI, MADDEN, NEILSON, GREEN, VENKAT, FRIEL, GERGELY, B. MILLER, SCHLOSSBERG, SANCHEZ, MALAGARI, JAMES, HOWARD, GALLAGHER, BRENNAN, HILL-EVANS, HARKINS, KHAN, DONAHUE, O'MARA, D. WILLIAMS AND CIRESI, JUNE 29, 2023


REFERRED TO COMMITTEE ON STATE GOVERNMENT, JUNE 29, 2023 


A RESOLUTION
Directing the Joint State Government Commission to establish an advisory committee to conduct a study on the field of artificial intelligence and its impact and potential future impact in Pennsylvania.


WHEREAS, Artificial intelligence (AI) means models and systems performing functions generally associated with human intelligence, including reasoning and learning; and


WHEREAS, Recent news stories and reports have shown the rapid acceleration of AI utilization across many different industries in this Commonwealth; and


WHEREAS, While AI has the potential to be a tool to improve a variety of industries, many experts in the artificial intelligence field have been warning that we may be moving too quickly for comfort; and


WHEREAS, The "godfather of AI" Geoffrey Hinton left his job at Google, where he developed AI programs, to "blow the whistle" on the dangers that artificial intelligence possess; and


WHEREAS, It is important for the Commonwealth to take measures to study artificial intelligence's effect and impact; and


WHEREAS, The automation of manufacturing and other jobs by artificial intelligence poses a significant threat to organized labor and blue-collar workers throughout this Commonwealth; and


WHEREAS, Algorithms via AI programs have been used to spread heinous disinformation relating to health, public safety and politics for some time; and


WHEREAS, Universities across this Commonwealth have experienced an influx of academic integrity-related disciplinary actions against their students which have been attributed to AI programs, like ChatGPT, that harm student achievement and skill development; and


WHEREAS, AI-based algorithms have been utilized by technology and advertising companies for as long as the Internet has existed, but the methodical gathering of information to determine the content of their advertising remains nontransparent; and


WHEREAS, Companies that utilize AI in their advertising must be transparent in how these bots are fed information about the user; and


WHEREAS, The health care industry has been utilizing artificial intelligence as a tool since the 1970s; and


WHEREAS, There are plans to expand AI's use across multiple different facets of the health care industry putting nurses and hospital staff out of jobs; and


WHEREAS, Processing of medical data could be fully automated within the next decade, reducing the employment opportunities of technicians; and


WHEREAS, Cybersecurity automation via AI programs poses a significant threat to our State government, the Pennsylvania National Guard and all its components, the Pennsylvania Department of Military and Veterans Affairs and the Pennsylvania State Police; and


WHEREAS, Current technology contains significant pitfalls in the quality of the cybersecurity provided by AI programs; and


WHEREAS, Cyberterrorists, whether domestic or foreign, are trained to bypass and take advantage of any flaw that exists in a security system; therefore be it


 RESOLVED, That the House of Representatives direct the Joint State Government Commission to investigate the field of artificial intelligence and make recommendations on the responsible growth of this Commonwealth's emerging technology markets and the use of artificial intelligence in State government and study how other states regulate the artificial intelligence field; and be it further


 RESOLVED, That the Joint State Government Commission establish an advisory committee to assist in this study; and be it further


RESOLVED, That the advisory committee be composed of the following members:
(1) The Secretary of Administration or a designee.
(2) The Secretary of Community and Economic Development or a designee.
(3) The Secretary of Education or a designee.
(4) The Secretary of Health or a designee.
(5) The Secretary of Labor and Industry or a designee.
(6) The Secretary of Transportation or a designee.
(7) The Adjutant General of the Pennsylvania National Guard or a designee.
(8) The Commissioner of Pennsylvania State Police or a designee.
(9) Two members of the House of Representatives, one appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and one appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
(10) Two individuals representing organized labor in this Commonwealth to be selected by the Joint State Government Commission, upon the recommendation of the governing body of the Pennsylvania AFL-CIO.
(11) One individual representing the Pennsylvania Chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union to be selected by the Joint State Government Commission, upon the recommendation of the governing body of the Pennsylvania Chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union.
(12) One attorney or legal educator to be selected by the Joint State Government Commission.
(13) Two individuals who are academics at a postsecondary institution to be selected by the Joint State Government Commission.
(14) One individual with experience in the field of ethics and human rights to be selected by the Joint State Government Commission.
(15) Two individuals who are artificial intelligence (AI) engineers to be selected by the Joint State Government Commission.
(16) One member who is a secondary or postsecondary student in this Commonwealth to be selected by the Joint State Government Commission.
(17) One individual representing the Pennsylvania Medical Society to be selected by the Joint State Government Commission, upon the recommendation of the governing body of the Pennsylvania Medical Society.
(18) Five individuals with knowledge and expertise in matters involving emerging technologies and the field of artificial intelligence to be selected by the Joint State Government Commission; and be it further


 RESOLVED, That the Joint State Government Commission, in collaboration with the advisory committee, conduct a study and present a report that, at a minimum, includes the following:
(1) An assessment of the development and use of AI technology, including benefits and risks.
(2) Whether and how to use AI in State government, including an analysis of the fiscal impact, if any, on the State.
(3) Proposed legislation for State regulation of the AI field if recommended by the advisory committee.
(4) A summary of the development and current use of AI in this Commonwealth.
(5) A proposal for a definition of AI.
(6) A proposal for the responsible and ethical development of AI in this Commonwealth, including an identification of the potential risks and benefits of such development.
(7) A recommendation on whether the General Assembly should establish a permanent commission to study the AI field.
(8) A recommendation for the allocation of rights and duties between workers and employers to oversee the implementation of AI programs across this Commonwealth.
(9) An assessment of how AI has been used to create products of disinformation, and conduct efforts to curb these disinformation campaigns.
(10) An evaluation of how AI has affected the academic track record of this Commonwealth's students, and assist State-related university leaders with identifying solutions to curbing the usage of AI by their students.
(11) Any other matters regarding AI deemed relevant and appropriate by the Joint State Government Commission; and be it further


 RESOLVED, That the Joint State Government Commission, working with the advisory committee, be authorized to request information that is not protected from disclosure from State agencies and departments for the study on behalf of the House of Representatives; and be it further


 RESOLVED, That the Joint State Government Commission, working with the advisory committee, issue a report with its findings and recommendations no later than 18 months after the adoption of this resolution to all of the following:
(1) The President pro tempore of the Senate.
(2) The Speaker of the House of Representatives.
(3) The Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the Senate.
(4) The Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
(5) The chair and minority chair of the Appropriations Committee of the Senate.
(6) The chair and minority chair of the Appropriations Committee of the House of Representatives.
(7) The chair and minority chair of the Communications and Technology Committee of the Senate.
(8) The chair and minority chair of the Consumer Protection, Technology and Utilities Committee of the House of Representatives.
(9) The chair and minority chair of the Education Committee of the Senate.
(10) The chair and minority chair of the Education Committee of the House of Representatives.
(11) The chair and minority chair of the Judiciary Committee of the Senate.
(12) The chair and minority chair of the Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives.
(13) The chair and minority chair of the Labor and Industry Committee of the Senate.
(14) The chair and minority chair of the Labor and Industry Committee of the House of Representatives.
(15) The chair and minority chair of the Transportation Committee of the Senate.
(16) The chair and minority chair of the Transportation Committee of the House of Representatives.