Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Artificial Intelligence 
Accountability Act'' or the ``AI Accountability Act''.SEC. 2. STUDY ON ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
              SYSTEMS.(a) Study.--The Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Communications 
and Information shall conduct a study on accountability measures for 
artificial intelligence systems, which shall include an analysis of the 
following:
            (1) How accountability measures are being incorporated into 
        artificial intelligence systems used by communications networks 
        (including telecommunications networks and social media 
        platforms) and electromagnetic spectrum sharing applications.
            (2) How accountability measures for artificial intelligence 
        systems can facilitate the closing of the digital divide and 
        assist the promotion of digital inclusion in the United States.
            (3) How accountability measures may reduce risks related to 
        artificial intelligence systems, including cybersecurity risks.
            (4) How the term ``trustworthy'' is used and defined in the 
        context of artificial intelligence, including how the term may 
        be applied in various contexts related to artificial 
        intelligence.
            (5) The relationship, with respect to artificial 
        intelligence, between the term ``trustworthy'' and other terms 
        such as ``responsible'' and ``human-centric''.(b) Stakeholder Consultation.--In carrying out the study required 
by subsection (a), the Assistant Secretary shall hold public meetings 
to consult with relevant stakeholders for the purpose of soliciting 
feedback on accountability measures for artificial intelligence 
systems.(c) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Assistant Secretary shall submit to the 
Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a 
report on the results of the study required by subsection (a) that 
shall include--
            (1) the results of the analysis required by subsection (a);
            (2) a description of the feedback provided during the 
        meetings required by subsection (b); and
            (3) recommendations for governmental and nongovernmental 
        actions to support effective accountability measures for 
        artificial intelligence systems.(d) Accountability Measure Defined.--In this section, the term 
``accountability measure'' means a mechanism, including an audit, an 
assessment, or a certification, designed to provide assurance that a 
system is trustworthy.SEC. 3. AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS.

    (a) Meetings.--The Assistant Secretary of Commerce for 
Communications and Information shall hold public meetings to consult 
with relevant stakeholders (including representatives of industry, 
academia, and consumers) for the purpose of soliciting feedback on--
            (1) the information that should be available to 
        individuals, communities, and businesses that interact with, 
        are affected by, or study artificial intelligence systems; and
            (2) the most effective methods for making such information 
        available to such individuals, communities, and businesses.
    (b) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Assistant Secretary shall submit to the 
Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a 
report on the results of the meetings required by subsection (a) that 
shall include--
            (1) a description of the feedback provided during the 
        meetings; and
            (2) recommendations with respect to--
                    (A) the information that should be available to 
                individuals, communities, and businesses that interact 
                with, are affected by, or study artificial intelligence 
                systems; and
                    (B) the methods to be used for making such 
                information available to such individuals, communities, 
                and businesses.