SEC. 834. PLAN FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM.

    (a) Plan.--Not later than 1 year 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of National 
Intelligence shall coordinate with the heads of other elements of the 
intelligence community and, in conjunction with the heads of those 
elements, shall--
            (1) develop a plan for the development and resourcing of a 
        modern digital ecosystem that embraces state-of-the-art tools 
        and modern processes to enable development, testing, fielding, 
        and continuous updating of artificial intelligence-powered 
        applications at speed and scale from headquarters to the 
        tactical edge; and
            (2) submit to the congressional intelligence committees the 
        plan developed under paragraph (1).
    (b) Contents of Plan.--At a minimum, the plan required by subsection 
(a) shall include the following:
            (1) Policies to enable elements of the intelligence 
        community to adopt a hoteling model to allow trusted small- and 
        medium-sized artificial intelligence companies access to 
        classified facilities on a flexible basis.
            (2) Policies for an open architecture and an evolving 
        reference design and guidance for needed technical investments 
        in the proposed ecosystem that address issues, including common 
        interfaces, authentication, applications, platforms, software, 
        hardware, and data infrastructure.
            (3) Policies to ensure, to the extent possible, 
        interoperability, and the reduction of duplication, of 
        artificial intelligence capabilities developed or acquired by 
        elements of the intelligence community.
            (4) A governance structure, 
        together with associated policies and guidance, to drive the 
        implementation of the reference throughout the intelligence 
        community on a federated basis.
            (5) Community standards for the use of artificial 
        intelligence and associated data, as appropriate.
            (6) Recommendations to ensure 
        that use of artificial intelligence and associated data by the 
        Federal Government related to United States persons comport with 
        rights relating to freedom of expression, equal protection, 
        privacy, and due process.

    (c) Form.--The plan submitted under subsection (a)(2) shall be 
submitted in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.