SEC. 1432. RESEARCH ON THE HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT EFFECTS OF MEDIA AND RELATED TECHNOLOGY ON INFANTS, CHILDREN, AND ADOLESCENTS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this 
section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall, as appropriate, conduct 
or support research related to the health and developmental effects, 
including long-term effects, of media and related technology use on 
infants, children, and adolescents, which may include the effects of 
exposure to, and use of, media and related technology, such as social 
media, applications, websites, television, motion pictures, artificial 
intelligence, mobile devices, computers, video games, virtual and 
augmented reality, and other content, networks, or platforms 
disseminated through the internet, broadcasted, or other media 
technologies, as applicable.    (b) Activities.--In carrying out subsection 
(a), the Secretary, acting through the Director of the National 
Institutes of Health, shall, as appropriate, develop a research agenda 
to assess the effects of media and related technologies on infants, 
children, and adolescents, which may include consideration of the 
following, as appropriate:
            (1) The cognitive development of infants, children, and 
        adolescents, which may include effects related to language 
        development, learning abilities, and other areas of cognitive 
        development.
            (2) The physical health of infants, children, and 
        adolescents, which may include effects related to diet, 
        exercise, sleeping and eating routines, and other areas of 
        physical development.
            (3) The mental health of infants, children, and adolescents, 
        which may include effects related to self-awareness, social 
        awareness, relationship skills, decision-making, violence, 
        bullying, privacy, mental disorders, and other areas related to 
        mental health.
    (c) Consultation.--In developing the research agenda under 
subsection (b), the Secretary may consult with appropriate national 
research institutes, academies, and centers, relevant consortia, and 
non-Federal experts, as appropriate. The <<NOTE: Assessment.>>  
Secretary may utilize scientific workshops, symposia, and other 
activities to assess current knowledge and identify relevant research 
opportunities and gaps in this area.

    (d) Report to Congress.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Director of the National Institutes of Health 
shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and 
Pensions of the Senate a report--
            (1) on the progress made in improving data and expanding 
        research on the health and developmental effects of media
        and related technology on infants, children, and adolescents in 
        accordance with this section; and
            (2) that summarizes the grants and 
        research funded under this section for each of the years covered 
        by the report.