H. R. 4076


To authorize funding for a bilateral cooperative program with Israel for the development of health technologies.


IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 13, 2023
Mr. Pappas (for himself, Mr. Panetta, Ms. Salazar, Mr. Crenshaw, Mr. Graves of Louisiana, Ms. Mace, Mr. Van Drew, Mr. Waltz, Mr. Nunn of Iowa, Mr. Fitzpatrick, Mr. Gimenez, Mr. Ezell, Mr. Dunn of Florida, Mr. Moolenaar, Mr. Lawler, Mr. Lamborn, Mr. Mooney, Mr. Molinaro, Mr. Kim of New Jersey, Mr. Davis of North Carolina, Mr. Ciscomani, Mr. Arrington, Mrs. McClain, Mr. Bacon, Mr. Gottheimer, Mr. Moskowitz, Mr. Auchincloss, Mr. Lieu, Mr. Schiff, Ms. Tokuda, Mr. Kilmer, Ms. Stevens, Ms. Brownley, Mr. Sherman, Mr. Sorensen, Ms. Titus, Mr. Boyle of Pennsylvania, Mr. Levin, Mrs. Trahan, Ms. Meng, Mr. Mullin, Mr. Cohen, Ms. Craig, Mr. Fleischmann, Mr. Kean of New Jersey, Mr. Steube, Mr. Tony Gonzales of Texas, Mr. Bilirakis, Mr. Grothman, Mr. Bost, Mr. Miller of Ohio, Mr. Rutherford, Ms. Brown, Mr. Turner, Mr. Johnson of South Dakota, Mr. Wilson of South Carolina, and Mr. Kustoff) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce


A BILL
To authorize funding for a bilateral cooperative program with Israel for the development of health technologies.


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.


This Act may be cited as the “United States-Israel Health Technologies Cooperation Act”.SEC. 2. BILATERAL COOPERATIVE AGREEMENT.


(a) Authorization Of Appropriations.—There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Health and Human Services $4,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2024 through 2026 for a bilateral cooperative program with the Government of Israel for awarding grants for the development of health technologies, including such technologies described in subsection (b), subject to subsection (c), with an emphasis on collaboratively advancing the use of technology, personalized medicine, and data in relation to emerging infectious diseases.


(b) Types Of Health Technologies.—The health technologies described in this subsection shall include technologies such as artificial intelligence, drugs and vaccinations, respiratory assist devices, diagnostic tests, and telemedicine.


(c) Restrictions On Funding.—The funding under subsection (a) is subject to a matching contribution from the Government of Israel.


(d) Option For Establishing New Program.—The amounts appropriated under subsection (a) may be—


(1) for a bilateral program with the Government of Israel that is in existence on the day before the date of enactment of this Act for the purposes described in such subsection; or


(2) for a bilateral program with the Government of Israel that is established after the date of enactment of this Act by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in consultation with the Secretary of State, in accordance with the Agreement between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of the State of Israel on Cooperation in Science and Technology for Homeland Security Matters, done at Jerusalem May 29, 2008 (or a successor agreement), for the purposes described in subsection (a).