SEC. 101.   SHORT TITLE.

    This title may be cited as the ``AI in Government Act of 2020''.
    
SEC. 102. DEFINITIONS.

    In this Act--
            (1) the term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of 
        General Services;
            (2) the term ``agency'' has the meaning given the term in 
        section 3502 of title 44, United States Code;
            (3) the term ``AI CoE'' means the AI Center of Excellence 
        described in section 103;

            (4) the term ``artificial intelligence'' has the meaning 
        given the term in section 238(g) of the John S. McCain National 
        Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (10 U.S.C. 2358 
        note);
            (5) the term ``Director'' means the Director of the Office 
        of Management and Budget;
            (6) the term ``institution of higher education'' has the 
        meaning given the term in section 101 of the Higher Education 
        Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001); and
            (7) the term ``nonprofit organization'' means an 
        organization described in section 501(c)(3)of the Internal 
        Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from taxation under section 
        501(a) of that Code.
SEC. 103. AI CENTER OF EXCELLENCE.

    (a) In General.--There is created within the General Services 
Administration a program to be known as the ``AI Center of Excellence'', 
which shall--
            (1) facilitate the adoption of artificial intelligence 
        technologies in the Federal Government;
            (2) improve cohesion and competency in the adoption and use 
        of artificial intelligence within the Federal Government; and
            (3) carry out paragraphs (1) and (2) for the purposes of 
        benefitting the public and enhancing the productivity and 
        efficiency of Federal Government operations.
    (b) Duties.--The duties of the AI CoE shall include--
            (1) regularly convening individuals from agencies, industry, 
        Federal laboratories, nonprofit organizations, institutions of 
        higher education, and other entities to discuss recent 
        developments in artificial intelligence, including the 
        dissemination of information regarding programs, pilots, and 
        other initiatives at agencies, as well as recent trends and 
        relevant information on the understanding, adoption, and use of 
        artificial intelligence;
            (2) collecting, aggregating, and publishing on a publicly 
        available website information regarding programs, pilots, and 
        other initiatives led by other agencies and any other 
        information determined appropriate by the Administrator;
            (3) advising the Administrator, the Director, and agencies 
        on the acquisition and use of artificial intelligence through 
        technical insight and expertise, as needed;
            (4) assist agencies in applying Federal policies regarding 
        the management and use of data in applications of artificial 
        intelligence;
            (5) consulting with agencies, including the Department of 
        Defense, the Department of Commerce, the Department of Energy, 
        the Department of Homeland Security, the Office of Management 
        and Budget, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, 
        and the National Science Foundation, that operate programs, 
        create standards and guidelines, or otherwise fund internal 
        projects or coordinate between the public and private sectors 
        relating to artificial intelligence;
            (6) advising the Director on developing policy related to 
        the use of artificial intelligence by agencies; and
            (7) advising the Director of the Office of Science and 
        Technology Policy on developing policy related to research and 
        national investment in artificial intelligence.
    (c) Staff.--
            (1) In general.--The Administrator shall provide necessary 
        staff, resources, and administrative support for the AI CoE.
            (2) Shared staff.--To the maximum extent practicable, the 
        Administrator shall meet the requirements described under 
        paragraph (1) by using staff of the General Services 
        Administration, including those from other agency centers of 
        excellence, and detailees, on a reimbursable or nonreimbursable 
        basis, from other agencies.
            (3) Fellows.--The Administrator may, to the maximum extent 
        practicable, appoint fellows to participate in the AI CoE from 
        nonprofit organizations, think tanks, institutions of higher 
        education, and industry.

    (d) Sunset.--This section shall cease to be effective on the date 
that is 5 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 104.   GUIDANCE FOR AGENCY USE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.

    (a)   Guidance.--
Not later than 270 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Director, in coordination with the Director of the Office of Science and 
Technology Policy in consultation with the Administrator and any other 
relevant agencies and key stakeholders as determined by the Director, 
shall issue a memorandum to the head of each agency that shall--
            (1) inform the development of policies regarding Federal 
        acquisition and use by agencies regarding technologies that are 
        empowered or enabled by artificial intelligence, including an 
        identification of the responsibilities of agency officials 
        managing the use of such technology;
            (2)   recommend approaches to 
        remove barriers for use by agencies of artificial intelligence 
        technologies in order to promote the innovative application of 
        those technologies while protecting civil liberties, civil 
        rights, and economic and national security;
            (3) identify best practices for identifying, assessing, and 
        mitigating any discriminatory impact or bias on the basis of any 
        classification protected under Federal nondiscrimination laws, 
        or any unintended consequence of the use of artificial 
        intelligence, including policies to identify data used to train 
        artificial intelligence algorithms as well as the data analyzed 
        by artificial intelligence used by the agencies; and
            (4) provide a template of the required contents of the 
        agency plans described in subsection (c).
    (b) Public Comment.--To help ensure public trust in the applications 
of artificial intelligence technologies, the Director shall issue a 
draft version of the memorandum required under subsection (a) for public 
comment not later than 180 days after date of enactment of this Act.
    (c)   Plans.--Not later 
than 180 days after the date on which the Director issues the memorandum 
required under subsection (a) or an update to the memorandum required 
under subsection (d), the head of each agency shall submit to the 
Director and post on a publicly available page on the website of the 
agency--
            (1) a plan to achieve consistency with the memorandum; or
            (2)   a written determination that 
        the agency does not use and does not anticipate using artificial 
        intelligence.

    (d)   Updates.--Not later than 2 years after 
the date on which the Director issues the memorandum required under 
subsection (a), and every 2 years thereafter for 10 years, the Director 
shall issue updates to the memorandum.
SEC. 105.   UPDATE OF OCCUPATIONAL SERIES FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.

    (a) In General.--Not later than 18 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act, and in accordance with chapter 51 of title 5, 
United States Code, the Director of the Office of Personnel Management 
shall--
            (1) identify key skills and competencies needed for 
        positions related to artificial intelligence;
            (2) establish an occupational series, or update and improve 
        an existing occupational job series, to include positions the 
        primary duties of which relate to artificial intelligence;
            (3) to the extent appropriate, establish an estimate of the 
        number of Federal employees in positions related to artificial 
        intelligence, by each agency; and
            (4) using the estimate established in paragraph (3), prepare 
        a 2-year and 5-year forecast of the number of Federal employees 
        in positions related to artificial intelligence that each agency 
        will need to employ.
    (b)   Plan.--Not later than 120 days after the 
date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Personnel 
Management shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Oversight and 
Reform of the House of Representatives a comprehensive plan with a 
timeline to complete requirements described in subsection (a).