 SEC. 108. COMPUTING RESOURCES PRIORITIZATION.


Section 108 of the Weather Research and Forecasting Innovation Act of 2017 (15 U.S.C. 8518) is amended by striking subsection (a)(3)(C) and all that follows through subsection (b)(7) and inserting the following new subsections:

 “(b) Computing Research Initiative.—


“(1) IN GENERAL.—The Under Secretary, in collaboration with the Secretary of Energy, shall carry out an initiative, which may leverage Department of Energy high performance computers, cloud computing, or expertise, to run advanced coupled models in order to conduct proof of concept scenarios in comparison with current issued forecasts and models. The Under Secretary and Secretary of Energy shall carry out the initiative through a competitive, merit-reviewed process, and consider applications from Federal agencies, National Laboratories, institutions of higher education (as such term is defined in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001)), nonprofit institutions, and other appropriate entities (or a consortia thereof).


“(2) COMPONENTS.—In carrying out the initiative under paragraph (1), the Under Secretary shall prevent duplication and coordinate research efforts in artificial intelligence, high performance computing, cloud computing, quantum computing, modeling and simulation, machine learning, data assimilation, large scale data analytics, and predictive analysis across the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and may—


“(A) conduct research to compare National Weather Service forecast and model outputs to predictions and model outputs developed through such initiative;


“(B) share relevant modeling system and applications innovations developed through such initiative, including Unified Forecast System-based applications, through community-based activities, in accordance with section 10601 of the James M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023 (15 U.S.C. 8512a);


“(C) leverage coordinating activities managed by the National Science and Technology Council, the Interagency Council for Advancing Meteorological Services, and other relevant interagency entities;


“(D) provide sufficient capacity for long-term archive and access of model output to support research and long-term study;


“(E) determine computing decisions based on an agile requirements framework; and


“(F) support the training, recruitment, and retention of the next generation weather, water, and climate computing workforce through incentives and pathways for career development and employment opportunities.


“(3) RESEARCH SECURITY.—The activities authorized under this section shall be applied in a manner consistent with subtitle D of title VI of the Research and Development, Competition, and Innovation Act (enacted as division B of Public Law 117–167; 42 U.S.C. 19231 et seq.).


“(4) TERMINATION.—The authority under this subsection shall terminate five years after the date of the enactment of this subsection.

 “(c) Artificial Intelligence Investments.—The Under Secretary shall leverage artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies to facilitate, optimize, and further leverage advanced computing to accomplish critical missions of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration by enhancing existing and forthcoming high-performance and cloud computing infrastructure or systems.

 “(d) Centers Of Excellence.—The Under Secretary may expand, and where applicable establish, centers of excellence to aid the adoption of next-generation artificial intelligence and machine learning enabled advanced computing capabilities. Each such center may carry out activities that include the following:


“(1) Leveraging robust public-private partnership models to provide access to training, experience, and long-term development of workforce and infrastructure.


“(2) Developing and optimizing tools, libraries, algorithms, data structures, and other supporting software necessary for specific applications on high performance computing systems.


“(3) Applying modern artificial intelligence, deep machine-learning, and advanced data analysis technologies to address current and future mission challenges.


“(4) To the maximum extent practicable, explore quantum computing and related application partnerships with public, private, and academic entities to improve the accuracy and resolution of weather predictions.

 “(e) Multi-Year Contracts.—The Under Secretary may enter into multi-year contracts in accordance with section 3903 of title 41, United States Code, and shall ensure compliance with all clauses provided in such section to support operations, research, and development related to high performance and cloud computing infrastructure or systems with an unfunded contingent liability in the event of cancellation.

 “(f) Report.—Not later than two years after the date of the enactment of this subsection, the Under Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate a report evaluating the following:


“(1) The effectiveness of the initiative required under subsection (b), including applied research discoveries and advanced modeling improvements achieved.


“(2) A best estimate of the overall value of high-resolution probabilistic forecast guidance for hazardous weather or water events (as such term is defined in section 406) using a next-generation weather forecast and warning framework.


“(3) The needs for cloud computing, quantum computing, or high-performance computing, visualization, and dissemination collaboration between the Department of Energy and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.


“(4) A timeline and guidance for implementation of the following:


“(A) High-resolution numerical weather prediction models.


“(B) Methods for meeting the cloud computing, quantum computing, or high-performance computing, visualization, and dissemination needs identified under paragraph (3).”.