SEC. 6. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Report On Department Of State Implementation Of Partnership.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in coordination with the Secretary of Defense and, as appropriate, the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of Energy, shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on efforts of the Department of State to implement the AUKUS partnership.(2) ELEMENTS.—The report required under paragraph (1) shall include the following elements:
(A) Regarding the achievement of Phase One goals for of the Optimal Pathway for AUKUS Pillar One for each of calendar years 2023, 2024, 2025, 2026, and 2027, the following:
(i) A description of progress by the Government of Australia in negotiating an Article 14 Arrangement with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
(ii) A description of the status of efforts by the Government of Australia to build the supporting infrastructure to base conventionally armed nuclear powered attack submarines.
(iii) Updates on the efforts by the Government of Australia to train a workforce that can build, sustain, and operate conventionally armed nuclear powered attack submarines.
(iv) A description of progress by the Government of Australia in building a new submarine facility to support the basing and disposition of a nuclear attack submarine on the east coast of Australia.
(v) The number of Australian personnel embedded on United States Navy ships during Phase One of the Optimal Pathway.
(vi) A description of progress in establishing basing to support submarine rotational forces in western Australia by 2027.
(vii) A description of how the United States plans to provide up to five Virginia Class submarines to Australia by the early to mid-2030’s.
(viii) A strategy for AUKUS partners to integrate newly built SSN–AUKUS submarines and five United States Virginia Class submarines into a single, cohesive fleet.
(ix) A detailed assessment of how Australia’s sovereign conventionally armed nuclear attack submarines contribute to United States defense and deterrence objectives in the Indo-Pacific region.(B) For each of the calendar years 2021 and 2022—
(i) the average and median times for the United States Government to review applications for licenses, disaggregated by license type and other agreements, to export defense articles or defense services to persons, corporations, and the governments (including agencies and subdivisions of such governments, including official missions of such governments) of Australia and the United Kingdom;
(ii) the number of applications from Australia and the United Kingdom for licenses to export defense articles and defense services that were denied, returned without action, or approved with provisos, listed by year;
(iii) the average and median times for the United States Government to review applications from Australia and the United Kingdom for foreign military sales beginning from the date Australia or the United Kingdom submitted a letter of request that resulted in a letter of acceptance; and
(iv) the number of requests from Australia and the United Kingdom for foreign military sales that were denied.
(C) A list of relevant United States laws, regulations, and treaties and other international agreements to which the United States is a party that govern authorizations to export defense articles or defense services that are required to implement the AUKUS partnership.
(D) An assessment of key recommendations the United States Government has provided to the Governments of Australia and the United Kingdom to revise laws, regulations, and policies of such countries that are required to implement the AUKUS partnership.(E) An assessment of—
(i) recommended improvements to export control laws and regulations of Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States that such countries should make to implement the AUKUS partnership and to otherwise meet the requirements of section 38(j)(2) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778(j)(2)); and
(ii) the challenges the Governments of Australia and the United Kingdom have conveyed in meeting these requirements, including with respect to sensitive defense technology security controls.(b) Report On Interagency Actions.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in coordination with the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Energy, and the Secretary of Commerce, shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on actions taken at the interagency level to implement the advanced capabilities pillar of the AUKUS agreement.(2) ELEMENTS.—The report required under paragraph (1) shall include the following elements:
(A) A description of changes to the International Traffic in Regulations (ITAR) and the United States export control regime that are necessary to implement the AUKUS agreement and to permit AUKUS member states and Canada to exchange defense items at classified and unclassified levels.
(B) A plan for reducing barriers and implementing the changes as described in ITAR, including a description of any changes that will require new authorities from Congress.
(C) A description of the progress the Department of Defense, the Department of Energy, and the Department of Commerce have made in implementing any changes as described in subparagraphs (A) and (B).
(D) A list of actions the Departments have requested the Governments of the United Kingdom and Australia to take in order to amend their export control systems in a way that is comparable to that of the United States.
(E) An assessment of the efforts of AUKUS partners to enhance collaboration across the following eight trilateral Lines of Effort:
(i) Undersea capabilities.
(ii) Quantum technologies.
(iii) Artificial Intelligence and autonomy.
(iv) Advanced cyber capabilities.
(v) Hypersonic and counter-hypersonic capabilities.
(vi) Electronic warfare.
(vii) Innovation.
(viii) Information sharing.
(F) An annex describing the content and timing of consultations amongst AUKUS partners on Pillar One and for the eight Lines of Effort in Pillar Two.(c) Briefing.—Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for 7 years, the President shall provide a briefing to the appropriate congressional committees regarding the status of AUKUS implementation across both pillars and on all lines of effort.