 H. R. 8005


To establish the Commission of Experts on Child Exploitation and Artificial Intelligence.


IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 15, 2024
Mr. Langworthy (for himself, Mr. Fry, Mr. Lawler, Mr. Davis of North Carolina, Mrs. Miller of Illinois, Mr. Nunn of Iowa, Mr. Carson, Mrs. Hinson, Mr. Bacon, Ms. Adams, Ms. Tenney, and Mr. D'Esposito) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary


A BILL
To establish the Commission of Experts on Child Exploitation and Artificial Intelligence.


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,

 SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.


This Act may be cited as the “Child Exploitation and Artificial Intelligence Expert Commission Act of 2024”.

 SEC. 2. COMMISSION OF EXPERTS ON CHILD EXPLOITATION AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.


(a) Establishment.—There is established a commission, to be known as the “Commission of Experts on Child Exploitation and Artificial Intelligence” (in this section referred to as the “Commission”), which shall investigate and make recommendations on solutions to improve the ability of a law enforcement agency to prevent, detect, and prosecute child exploitation crimes committed using artificial intelligence.

 (b) Duties Of Commission.—The Commission shall—


(1) investigate and assess how artificial intelligence may be used in the commission of a child exploitation crime;


(2) evaluate the ability of a law enforcement agency to prevent, detect, and prosecute child exploitation crimes committed using artificial intelligence under the law in effect during the period of the evaluation of the Commission, including by identifying any statutory language, constitutional provision, or court decision that impedes such prosecutions; and


(3) recommend solutions to improve the ability of a law enforcement agency to prevent, detect, and prosecute child exploitation crimes committed using artificial intelligence, including recommendations for statutory or constitutional amendments to address the statutory language, constitutional provisions, or court decisions identified under paragraph (2).

 (c) Reports.—


(1) INTERIM REPORTS.—The Commission may submit interim reports to the Congress containing such findings, conclusions, and recommendations as have been agreed to by the Commission.


(2) FINAL REPORT.—Not later than 2 years after the date on which 13 members have been appointed to the Commission under subsection (d), the Commission shall submit a final report to the Congress containing such findings, conclusions, and recommendations as have been agreed to by the Commission.

 (d) Membership.—


(1) NUMBER AND APPOINTMENT.—The Commission shall be composed of 13 members appointed as follows:


(A) 7 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.


(B) 2 members appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.


(C) 2 members appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.


(D) 2 members appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.


(2) QUALIFICATIONS.—An individual appointed to the Commission shall have expertise in law enforcement, artificial intelligence, technology ethics, child psychology, or a related field.


(3) NONGOVERNMENTAL APPOINTEES.—An individual appointed to the Commission may not be an officer or employee of the Federal Government or any State or unit of local government.


(4) TERMS.—Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.


(5) DEADLINE FOR APPOINTMENT.—Each member shall be appointed not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.


(6) NO COMPENSATION.—Members shall serve without pay, but shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.


(7) CHAIRPERSON; VICE CHAIRPERSON.—The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the members of the Commission. The term of office of the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall be for the life of the Commission.

 (e) Procedures Of Commission.—


(1) MEETINGS.—Not later than 30 days after the date on which 13 members have been appointed to the Commission under subsection (d), the Commission shall hold an initial meeting, at which the members of the Commission shall elect the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. Thereafter, the Commission shall meet—


(A) quarterly; and


(B) at the call of a majority of its members.


(2) QUORUM.—A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum to conduct business, but the Commission may establish a lesser quorum for conducting hearings scheduled by the Commission.


(3) VOTING.—No proxy voting shall be allowed on behalf of a member of the Commission.


(4) RULES.—The Commission may establish by majority vote any other rules for the conduct of Commission business, if such rules are not inconsistent with this section or any other applicable law.

 (f) Staff Of Commission; Experts And Consultants.—


(1) STAFF.—Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the Chairperson may appoint and fix the pay of a staff director and additional personnel as the Chairperson considers appropriate.


(2) APPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN CIVIL SERVICE LAWS.—The staff director and personnel of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the annual rate of basic pay for level V of the Executive Schedule.


(3) PERSONNEL AS FEDERAL EMPLOYEES.—The staff director and any employee of the Commission shall be employees under section 2105 of title 5, United States Code, for purposes of chapters 63, 81, 83, 84, 85, 87, 89, and 90 of that title.


(4) DETAILEES.—Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement from the Commission, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.


(5) VOLUNTEER SERVICES.—Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United States Code, the Commission may accept and use voluntary and uncompensated services as the Commission determines necessary.


(6) EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.—The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily rate paid to a person occupying a position at level IV of the Executive Schedule.

 (g) Powers Of Commission.—


(1) HEARINGS AND SESSIONS.—The Commission may, for the purposes of carrying out this section, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.


(2) OBTAINING OFFICIAL DATA.—The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this section. Upon the request of the Chairperson, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.


(3) GIFTS, BEQUESTS, AND DEVISES.—To the extent or in the amounts provided in advance in appropriations Acts, the Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purposes of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission. Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales or other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Chairperson.


(4) MAILS.—The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as departments and agencies of the United States.


(5) ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT SERVICES.—


(A) GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION.—Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this section.


(B) OTHER DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES.—In addition to the assistance prescribed in subparagraph (A), the head of a department or agency of the United States may provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, such services, funds, facilities, staff, or other support services as such head may determine advisable and as may be authorized by law.


(6) CONTRACT AUTHORITY.—To the extent or in the amounts provided in advance in appropriations Acts, the Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for any purpose necessary to enable it to carry out this section.

 (h) Nonapplicability Of Federal Advisory Committee Act.—


(1) IN GENERAL.—Chapter 10 of part I of title 5, United States Code, shall not apply to the Commission.


(2) PUBLIC MEETINGS AND RELEASE OF PUBLIC VERSIONS OF REPORTS.—The Commission shall—


(A) hold public hearings and meetings to the extent appropriate; and


(B) release a public version of each report submitted under subsection (c).


(3) CONDUCT OF PUBLIC HEARINGS.—Any public hearing of the Commission shall be conducted in a manner consistent with the protection of information provided to or developed for or by the Commission as required by any applicable statute, regulation, or Executive order.


(i) Termination.—The Commission shall terminate 60 days after the date on which the Commission submits the final report under subsection (c).

 (j) Definitions.—In this section:


(1) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.—The term “artificial intelligence” includes a machine-based system that uses data, references, or machine or human-based inputs to—


(A) create a visual depiction, including an image or video;


(B) recognize a pattern; or


(C) make a recommendation, prediction, or decision.


(2) CHILD EXPLOITATION CRIME.—The term “child exploitation crime” means a crime under any Federal, State, local, or Tribal law relating to the sexual exploitation of children.


(3) LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.—The term “law enforcement agency” means any Federal, State, Tribal, or local governmental agency that is engaged in or supervises the prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution of a violation of criminal law.


(4) STATE.—The term “State” means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, and any commonwealth, territory, or possession of the United States.