 S. 3897


To require the Election Assistance Commission to develop voluntary guidelines for the administration of elections that address the use and risks of artificial intelligence technologies, and for other purposes.


IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 11, 2024
Ms. Klobuchar (for herself and Ms. Collins) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Rules and Administration


May 15, 2024
Reported by Ms. Klobuchar, with an amendment


[Strike out all after the enacting clause and insert the part printed in italic]


A BILL
To require the Election Assistance Commission to develop voluntary guidelines for the administration of elections that address the use and risks of artificial intelligence technologies, and for other purposes.


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,

 SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.


This Act may be cited as the “Preparing Election Administrators for AI Act”.

 SEC. 2. VOLUNTARY GUIDELINES FOR ADMINISTRATION OF ELECTIONS THAT ADDRESS THE USE AND RISKS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TECHNOLOGIES.


(a) Report And Voluntary Guidelines.—Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Election Assistance Commission shall, in consultation with the National Institute of Standards and Technology, submit to Congress, issue to State and local election offices, and make available to the public a report with voluntary guidelines for election offices that address the use and risks of artificial intelligence technologies in the administration of elections.


(b) Contents.—The report submitted and made available pursuant to subsection (a) shall include voluntary guidelines that address—


(1) the risks and benefits associated with using artificial intelligence technologies to conduct election administration activities;


(2) the cybersecurity risks of artificial intelligence technologies to election administration;


(3) how information generated and distributed by artificial intelligence technologies can affect the sharing of accurate election information and how election offices should respond; and


(4) how information generated and distributed by artificial intelligence technologies can affect the spreading of election disinformation that undermines public trust and confidence in elections.

 SEC. 3. STUDY ON USE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TECHNOLOGIES IN THE 2024 ELECTIONS.


(a) In General.—Not later than November 5, 2025, the Election Assistance Commission, in consultation with the National Institute of Standards and Technology, shall study and submit to Congress, issue to State and local election offices, and make available to the public a report on the use and impacts of artificial intelligence technologies in the elections for Federal office held in 2024, including how information generated by artificial intelligence technologies was shared and the use of artificial intelligence technologies by election offices.


(b) Review And Update Of Voluntary Guidelines.—Taking into consideration the results of the study conducted under subsection (a), the Election Assistance Commission shall review and update the voluntary guidelines issued under section 2(a) as appropriate.